GADSBY

I


If Youth, throughout all history, had had a champion to stand up for
it; to show a doubting world that a child can think; and, possibly,
do it practically; you wouldn't constantly run across folks today
who claim that "a child don't know anything." A child's brain starts
functioning at birth; and has, amongst its many infant convolutions,
thousands of dormant atoms, into which God has put a mystic possibility
for noticing an adult's act, and figuring out its purport.

Up to about its primary school days a child thinks, naturally, only of
play. But many a form of play contains disciplinary factors. "You can't
do this," or "that puts you out," shows a child that it must think,
practically, or fail. Now, if, throughout childhood, a brain has no
opposition, it is plain that it will attain a position of "status quo,"
as with our ordinary animals. Man knows not why a cow, dog or lion was
not born with a brain on a par with ours; why such animals cannot add,
subtract, or obtain from books and schooling, that paramount position
which Man holds today.

But a human brain is not in that class. Constantly throbbing and
pulsating, it rapidly forms opinions; attaining an ability of its own;
a fact which is startlingly shown by an occasional child "prodigy"
in music or school work. And as, with our dumb animals, a child's
inability convincingly to impart its thoughts to us, should not class
it as ignorant.

Upon this basis I am going to show you how a bunch of bright young
folks did find a champion; a man with boys and girls of his own; a man
of so dominating and happy individuality that Youth is drawn to him
as is a fly to a sugar bowl. It is a story about a small town. It is
not a gossipy yarn; nor is it a dry, monotonous account, full of such
customary "fill-ins" as "romantic moonlight casting murky shadows down
a long, winding country road." Nor will it say anything about tinklings
lulling distant folds; robins carolling at twilight, nor any "warm glow
of lamplight" from a cabin window. No. It is an account of up-and-doing
activity; a vivid portrayal of Youth as it is today; and a practical
discarding of that worn-out notion that "a child don't know anything."

Now, any author, from history's dawn, always had that most important
aid to writing:--an ability to call upon any word in his dictionary in
building up his story. That is, our strict laws as to word construction
did not block his path. But in _my_ story that mighty obstruction
_will_ constantly stand in my path; for many an important, common word
I cannot adopt, owing to its orthography.

I shall act as a sort of historian for this small town; associating
with its inhabitants, and striving to acquaint you with its youths,
in such a way that you can look, knowingly, upon any child, rich
or poor; forward or "backward;" your own, or John Smith's, in your
community. You will find many young minds aspiring to know how, and WHY
such a thing is so. And, if a child shows curiosity in that way, how
ridiculous it is for you to snap out:--

"Oh! Don't ask about things too old for you!"

Such a jolt to a young child's mind, craving instruction, is apt so
to dull its avidity, as to hold it back in its school work. Try to
look upon a child as a small, soft young body and a rapidly growing,
constantly inquiring brain. It must grow to maturity slowly. Forcing a
child through school by constant night study during hours in which it
should run and play, can bring on insomnia; handicapping both brain and
body.

Now this small town in our story had grown in just that way:--slowly;
in fact, much _too_ slowly to stand on a par with many a thousand
of its kind in this big, vigorous nation of ours. It was simply
stagnating; just as a small mountain brook, coming to a hollow, might
stop, and sink from sight, through not having a will to find a way
through that obstruction; or around it. You will run across such a
dormant town, occasionally; possibly so dormant that only outright
isolation by a fast-moving world, will show it its folly. If you will
tour Asia, Yucatan, or parts of Africa and Italy, you will find many
sad ruins of past kingdoms. Go to Indo-China and visit its gigantic
Ankhor Vat; call at Damascus, Baghdad and Samarkand. What sorrowful
lack of ambition many such a community shows in thus discarding such
high-class construction! And I say, again, that so will Youth grow
dormant, and hold this big, throbbing world back, if no champion backs
it up; thus providing it with an opportunity to show its ability for
looking forward, and improving unsatisfactory conditions.

So this small town of Branton Hills was lazily snoozing amidst
up-and-doing towns, as Youth's Champion, John Gadsby, took hold of it;
and shook its dawdling, flabby body until its inhabitants thought a
tornado had struck it. Call it tornado, volcano, military onslaught,
or what you will, this town found that it had a bunch of kids who had
wills that would admit of no snoozing; for that is Youth, on its
forward march of inquiry, thought and action.

If you stop to think of it, you will find that it is customary for
our "grown-up" brain to cast off many of its functions of its youth;
and to think only of what it calls "topics of maturity." Amongst such
discards, is many a form of happy play; many a muscular activity such
as walking, running, climbing; thus totally missing that alluring "joy
of living" of childhood. If you wish a vacation from financial affairs,
just go out and play with Youth. Play "blind-man's buff," "hop-scotch,"
"ring toss," and football. Go out to a charming woodland spot on a
picnic with a bright, happy, vivacious group. Sit down at a corn roast;
a marshmallow toast; join in singing popular songs; drink a quart of
good, rich milk; burrow into that big lunch box; and all such things
as banks, stocks, and family bills, will vanish on fairy wings, into
oblivion.

But this is not a claim that Man should stay always youthful. Supposing
that that famous Spaniard, landing upon Florida's coral strands, had
found that mythical Fountain of Youth; what a calamity for mankind! A
world without maturity of thought; without man's full-grown muscular
ability to construct mighty buildings, railroads and ships; a world
without authors, doctors, savants, musicians; nothing but Youth! I can
think of but a solitary approval of such a condition; for such a horror
as war would not,--could not occur; for a child is, naturally, a small
bunch of sympathy. I know that boys will "scrap;" also that "spats"
will occur amongst girls; but, at such a monstrosity as killings by
bombing towns, sinking ships, or mass annihilation of marching troops,
childhood would stand aghast. Not a tiny bird would fall; nor would
any form of gun nor facility for manufacturing it, insult that almost
Holy purity of youthful thought. Anybody who knows that wracking sorrow
brought upon a child by a dying puppy or cat, knows that childhood can
show us that our fighting, our policy of "a tooth for a tooth," is
abominably wrong.

So, now to start our story:--

Branton Hills was a small town in a rich agricultural district; and
having many a possibility for growth. But, through a sort of smug
satisfaction with conditions of long ago, had no thought of improving
such important adjuncts as roads; putting up public buildings, nor
laying out parks; in fact a dormant, slowly dying community. So
satisfactory was its status that it had no form of transportation to
surrounding towns but by railroad, or "old Dobbin." Now, any town thus
isolating its inhabitants, will invariably find this big, busy world
passing it by; glancing at it, curiously, as at an odd animal at a
circus; and, you will find, caring not a whit about its condition.
Naturally, a town should grow. You can look upon it as a child; which,
through natural conditions, should attain manhood; and add to its
surrounding thriving districts its products of farm, shop, or factory.
It should show a spirit of association with surrounding towns; crawl
out of its lair, and find how backward it is.

Now, in all such towns, you will find, occasionally, an individual born
with that sort of brain which, knowing that his town is backward, longs
to start things toward improving it; not only its living conditions,
but adding an institution or two, such as any _city_, big or small,
maintains, gratis, for its inhabitants. But so forward looking a man
finds that trying to instill any such notions into a town's ruling body
is about as satisfactory as butting against a brick wall. Such "Boards"
as you find ruling many a small town, function from such a soporific
rut that any hint of digging cash from its cast iron strong box with
its big brass padlock, will fall upon minds as rigid as rock.

Branton Hills _had_ such a man, to whom such rigidity was as annoying
as a thorn in his foot. Continuous trials brought only continual
thorn-pricks; until, finally, a brilliant plan took form as John
Gadsby found Branton Hills' High School pupils waking up to Branton
Hills' sloth. Gadsby continually found this bright young bunch asking:--

"Aw! Why is this town so slow? It's nothing but a dry twig!!"

"Ha!" said Gadsby; "A dry twig! That's it! Many a living, blossoming
branch all around us, and this solitary dry twig, with a tag hanging
from it, on which you will find: 'Branton Hills; A twig too lazy to
grow!'"

Now this put a "hunch" in Gadsby's brain, causing him to say; "A High
School pupil is not a child, now. Naturally a High School boy has not
a man's qualifications; nor has a High School girl womanly maturity.
But such kids, born in this swiftly moving day, think out many a notion
which will work, but which would pass our dads and granddads in cold
disdain. Just as ships pass at night. But supposing that such ships
should show a light in passing; or blow a horn; or, if--if--if--By
Golly! I'll do it!"

And so Gadsby sat on his blossom-bound porch on a mild Spring morning,
thinking and smoking. Smoking can calm a man down; and his thoughts
had so long and so constantly clung to this plan of his that a cool
outlook as to its promulgation was not only important, but paramount.
So, as his cigar was whirling and puffing rings aloft; and as groups
of bright, happy boys and girls trod past, to school, his plan rapidly
took form as follows:--

"Youth! What is it? Simply a start. A start of what? Why, of that most
astounding of all human functions; thought. But man didn't start his
brain working. No. All that an adult can claim is a continuation, or
an amplification of thoughts, dormant in his youth. Although a child's
brain can absorb instruction with an ability far surpassing that of a
grown man; and, although such a young brain is bound by rigid limits,
it contains a capacity for constantly craving additional facts. So,
in our backward Branton Hills, I just _know_ that I can find boys and
girls who can show our old moss-back Town Hall big-wigs a thing or two.
Why! On Town Hall night, just go and sit in that room and find out just
how stupid and stubborn a Council, (put _into_ Town Hall, you know,
through popular ballot!), can act. Say that a road is badly worn. Shall
it stay so? Up jumps Old Bill Simpkins claiming that it is a townsman's
duty to fix up his wagon springs if that road is too rough for him!"

As Gadsby sat thinking thus, his plan was rapidly growing; and, in a
month, was actually starting to work. How? You'll know shortly; but
first, you should know this John Gadsby; a man of "around fifty;" a
family man, and known throughout Branton Hills for his high standard of
honor and altruism on any kind of an occasion for public good. A loyal
churchman, Gadsby was a man who, though admitting that an occasional
fault in our daily acts is bound to occur, had taught his two boys and
a pair of girls that, though folks do slip from what Scriptural authors
call that "straight and narrow path," it will not pay to risk your own
Soul by slipping, just so that you can laugh at your ability in staying
out of prison; for Gadsby, having grown up in Branton Hills, could
point to many such man or woman. So, with such firm convictions in his
mind, this upstanding man was constantly striving so to act that no
complaint from man, woman or child should bring a word of disapproval.
In his mind, what a man might do was that man's affair only and could
stain no Soul but his own. And his altruism taught that it is not
difficult to find many ways in which to bring joy to such as cannot,
through physical disability, go out to look for it; and that only a
small bit of joy, brought to a shut-in invalid will carry with it such
a warmth as can flow only from acts of human sympathy.

For many days Gadsby had thought of ways in which folks with a goodly
bank account could aid in building up this rapidly backsliding town of
Branton Hills. But, how to show that class what a contribution could
do? In this town, full of capitalists and philanthropists contributing,
off and on, for shipping warming pans to Zulus, Gadsby saw a solution.
In whom? Why, in just that bunch of bright, happy school kids, back
from many a visit to a _city_, and noting its ability in improving its
living conditions. So Gadsby thought of thus carrying an inkling to
such capitalists as to how this stagnating town could claim a big spot
upon our national map, which is now shown only in small, insignificant
print.

As a start, Branton Hills' "Daily Post" would carry a long story,
outlining a list of factors for improving conditions. This it did; but
it will always stay as a blot upon high minds and proud blood that not
a man or woman amongst such capitalists saw, in his plan, any call for
dormant funds. But did that stop Gadsby? Can you stop a rising wind?
Hardly! So Gadsby took into council about forty boys of his vicinity
and built up an Organization of Youth. Also about as many girls who had
known what it is, compulsorily to pass up many a picnic, or various
forms of sport, through a lack of public park land. So this strong,
vigorous combination of both youth and untiring activity, avidly took
up Gadsby's plan; for nothing so stirs up a youthful mind as an
opportunity for accomplishing anything that adults cannot do. And did
Gadsby _know_ Youth? I'll say so! His two sons and girls, now in High
or Grammar school, had taught him a thing or two; principal amongst
which was that all-dominating fact that, at a not too far distant day,
our young folks will occupy important vocational and also political
positions, and will look back upon this, _our_ day; smiling kindly at
our way of doing things. So, to say that many a Branton Hills "King of
Capital" got a bit huffy as a High School stripling was proving how
stubborn a rich man is if his dollars don't aid so vast an opportunity
for doing good, would put it mildly! Such downright _gall_ by a
half-grown kid to inform _him_; an outstanding light on Branton Hills'
tax list, that this town was sliding down hill; and would soon land
in an abyss of national oblivion! And our Organization girls! _How_
Branton Hills' rich old widows and plump matrons did sniff in disdain
as a group of High School pupils brought forth straightforward claims
that cash paving a road, is doing good practical work, but, in filling
up a strong box, is worth nothing to our town.

Oh, that class of nabobs! How thoroughly Gadsby _did_ know its
parsimony!! And how thoroughly did this hard-planning man know just
what a constant onslaught by Youth could do. So, in about a month, his
"Organization" had "waylaid," so to say, practically half of Branton
Hills' cash kings; and had so won out, through that commonly known
"pull" upon an adult by a child asking for what plainly is worthy,
that his mail brought not only cash, but two rich landlords put at his
disposal, tracts of land "for any form of occupancy which can, in any
way, aid our town." This land Gadsby's Organization promptly put into
growing farm products for gratis distribution to Branton Hills' poor;
and that burning craving of Youth for activity soon had it sprouting
corn, squash, potato, onion and asparagus crops; and, to "doll it up a
bit," put in a patch of blossoming plants.

Naturally any man is happy at a satisfactory culmination of his plans
and so, as Gadsby found that public philanthropy was but an affair
of plain, ordinary approach, it did not call for much brain work to
find that, possibly also, a way might turn up for putting handicraft
instruction in Branton Hills' schools; for schooling, according to
him, did not consist only of books and black-boards. Hands also should
know how to construct various practical things in woodwork, plumbing,
blacksmithing, masonry, and so forth; with thorough instruction
in sanitation, and that most important of all youthful activity,
gymnastics. For girls such a school could instruct in cooking, suit
making, hat making, fancy work, art and loom-work; in fact, about any
handicraft that a girl might wish to study, and which is not in our
standard school curriculum. But as Gadsby thought of such a school,
no way for backing it financially was in sight. Town funds naturally,
should carry it along; but town funds and Town Councils do not always
form what you might call synonymous words. So it was compulsory that
cash should actually "drop into his lap," via a continuation of
solicitations by his now grandly functioning Organization of Youth.
So, out again trod that bunch of bright, happy kids, putting forth
such plain, straightforward facts as to what Manual Training would
do for Branton Hills, that many saw it in that light. But you will
always find a group, or individual complaining that such things would
"automatically dawn" on boys and girls without any training. Old Bill
Simpkins was loud in his antagonism to what was a "crazy plan to dip
into our town funds just to allow boys to saw up good wood, and girls
to burn up good flour, trying to cook biscuits." Kids, according to
him, should go to work in Branton Hills' shopping district, and profit
by it.

"Bah! Why not start a class to show goldfish how to waltz! _I_ didn't
go to any such school; and what am I now? _A Councilman!_ I can't saw a
board straight, nor fry a potato chip; but I can show you folks how to
hang onto your town funds."

Old Bill was a notorious grouch; but our Organization occasionally
did find a totally varying mood. Old Lady Flanagan, with four boys in
school, and a husband many days too drunk to work, was loud in approval.

"Whoops! Thot's phwat I calls a grand thing! Worra, worra! I wish Old
Man Flanagan had had sich an opporchunity. But thot ignorant old clod
don't know nuthin' but boozin', tobacca shmokin' and ditch-diggin'. And
you know thot our Council ain't a-payin' for no ditch-scoopin' right
now. So _I'll_ shout for thot school! For my boys can find out how to
fix thot barn door our old cow laid down against."

Ha, ha! What a circus our Organization had with such varying moods and
outlooks! But, finally such a school was built; instructors brought in
from surrounding towns; and Gadsby was as happy as a cat with a ball of
yarn.

As Branton Hills found out what it can accomplish if it starts out with
vigor and a will to win, our Organization thought of laying out a big
park; furnishing an opportunity for small tots to romp and play on
grassy plots; a park for all sorts of sports, picnics, and so forth;
sand lots for babyhood; cozy arbors for girls who might wish to study,
or talk. (You might, possibly, find a girl who _can_ talk, you know!);
also shady nooks and winding paths for old folks who might find comfort
in such. Gadsby thought that a park is truly a most important adjunct
to any community; for, if a growing population has no out-door spot at
which its glooms, slumps and morbid thoughts can vanish upon wings of
sunlight, amidst bright colorings of shrubs and sky, it may sink into a
grouchy, fault-finding, squabbling group; and making such a showing for
surrounding towns as to hold back any gain in population or valuation.
Gadsby had a goodly plot of land in a grand location for a park and
sold it to Branton Hills for a dollar; that stingy Council to lay it
out according to his plans. And _how_ his Organization did applaud him
for this, his first "solo work!"

But schools and parks do not fulfill all of a town's calls. Many minds
of varying kinds will long for an opportunity for finding out things
not ordinarily taught in school. So Branton Hills' Public Library
was found too small. As it was now in a small back room in our High
School, it should occupy its own building; down town, and handy for
all; and with additional thousands of books and maps. Now, if you think
Gadsby and his youthful assistants stood aghast at such a gigantic
proposition, you just don't know Youth, as it is today. But to whom
could Youth look for so big an outlay as a library building would cost?
Books also cost; librarians and janitors draw pay. So, with light,
warmth, and all-round comforts, it was a task to stump a full-grown
politician; to say nothing of a plain, ordinary townsman and a bunch
of kids. So Gadsby thought of taking two bright boys and two smart
girls to Washington, to call upon a man in a high position, who had
got it through Branton Hills' popular ballot. Now, any politician is a
convincing orator. (That is, you know, all that politics consists of!);
and this big man, in contact with a visiting capitalist, looking for a
handout for his own district, got a donation of a thousand dollars. But
that wouldn't _start_ a public library; to say nothing of maintaining
it. So, back in Branton Hills, again, our Organization was out, as
usual, on its war-path.

Branton Hills' philanthropy was now showing signs of monotony; so our
Organization had to work its linguistic ability and captivating tricks
full blast, until that thousand dollars had so grown that a library was
built upon a vacant lot which had grown nothing but grass; and only a
poor quality of it, at that; and many a child and adult quickly found
ways of profitably passing odd hours.

Naturally Old Bill Simpkins was snooping around, sniffing and
snorting at any signs of making Branton Hills "look cityish," (a word
originating in Bill's vocabulary.)

"Huh!! _I_ didn't put in any foolish hours with books in my happy
childhood in this good old town! But I got along all right; and am now
having my say in its Town Hall doings. Books!! Pooh! Maps! BAH!! It's
silly to squat in a hot room squinting at a lot of print! If you want
to know about a thing, go to work in a shop or factory of that kind,
and find out about it first-hand."

"But, Bill," said Gadsby, "shops want a man who knows what to do
without having to stop to train him."

"Oh, that's all bosh! If a boss shows a man what a tool is for; and
if that man is any good, at all, why bring up this stuff you call
training? That man grabs a tool, works 'til noon; knocks off for an
hour; works 'til----"

At this point in Bill's blow-up an Italian Councilman was passing, and
put in his oar, with:--

"Ha, Bill! You thinka your man can worka all right, firsta day, huh?
You talka crazy so much as a fool! I laugha tinkin' of you startin' on
a patcha for my boota! You lasta just a half hour. Thisa library all
righta. This town too mucha what I call tight-wad!"

Oh, hum!! It's a tough job making old dogs do tricks. But our
Organization was now holding almost daily sittings, and soon a
bright girl thought of having band music in that now popular park.
And _what_ do you think that stingy Council did? It actually built a
most fantastic band-stand; got a contract with a first-class band,
and all without so much as a Councilman fainting away!! So, finally,
on a hot July Sunday, two solid hours of grand harmony brought joy
to many a poor Soul who had not for many a day, known that balm of
comfort which can "air out our brains' dusty corridors," and bring
such happy thrills, as Music, that charming Fairy, which knows no
human words, can bring. Around that gaudy band-stand, at two-thirty
on that first Sunday, sat or stood as happy a throng of old and young
as any man could wish for; and Gadsby and his "gang" got hand-clasps
and hand-claps, from all. A good band, you know, not only can stir and
thrill you; for it can play a soft crooning lullaby, a lilting waltz or
polka; or, with its wood winds, bring forth old songs of our childhood,
ballads of courting days, or hymns and carols of Christmas; and can
suit all sorts of folks, in all sorts of moods; for a Spaniard,
Dutchman or Russian can find similar joy with a man from Italy, Norway
or far away Brazil.




II


By now, Branton Hills was so proud of not only its "smarting up," but
also of its startling growth, on that account, that an application was
put forth for its incorporation as a city; a small city, naturally,
but full of that condition of Youth, known as "growing pains." So its
shabby old "Town Hall" sign was thrown away, and a black and gold onyx
slab, with "CITY HALL" blazing forth in vivid colors, put up, amidst
band music, flag waving, parading and oratory. In only a month from
that glorious day, Gadsby found folks "primping up"; girls putting on
bright ribbons; boys finding that suits could stand a good ironing;
and rich widows and portly matrons almost out-doing any rainbow in
brilliancy. An occasional shop along Broadway, which had a rattly door
or shaky windows was put into first class condition, to fit Branton
Hills' status as a city. Old Bill Simpkins was strutting around, as
pompous as a drum-major; for, now, that old Town Council would function
as a CITY council; HIS council! His own stamping ground! According to
him, from it, at no far day, "Bill Simpkins, City Councilman," would
show an anxiously waiting world how to run a city; though probably, I
think, how _not_ to run it.

It is truly surprising what a narrow mind, what a blind outlook a man,
brought up with practically no opposition to his boyhood wants, can
attain; though brought into contact with indisputably important data
for improving his city. Our Organization boys thought Bill "a bit off;"
but Gadsby would only laugh at his blasts against paying out city
funds; for, you know, all bombs don't burst; you occasionally find a
"dud."

But this furor for fixing up rattly doors or shaky windows didn't last;
for Old Bill's oratory found favor with a bunch of his old tight-wads,
who actually thought of inaugurating a campaign against Gadsby's
Organization of Youth. As soon as this was known about town, that
mythical pot, known as Public Opinion, was boiling furiously. A vast
majority stood back of Gadsby and his kids; so, old Bill's ranks could
count only on a small group of rich old Shylocks to whom a bank-book
was a thing to look into or talk about only annually; that is, on
bank-balancing days. This small minority got up a slogan:--"Why Spoil
a Good Old Town?" and actually did, off and on, talk a shopman out of
fixing up his shop or grounds. This, you know, put additional vigor
into our Organization; inspiring a boy to bring up a plan for calling
a month,--say July,--"pick-up, paint-up and wash-up month;" for it was
a plain fact that, all about town, was many a shabby spot; a lot of
buildings could stand a good coat of paint, and yards raking up; thus
showing surrounding towns that not only _could_ Branton Hills "doll
up," but had a class of inhabitants who gladly would go at such a plan,
and carry it through. So Gadsby got his "gang" out, to sally forth and
any man or woman who did not jump, at first, at such a plan by vigorous
Youth, was always brought around, through noticing how poorly a shabby
yard did look. So Gadsby put in Branton Hills' "Post" this stirring
call:--

"Raking up your yard or painting your building is simply improving it
both in worth; artistically and from a utilization standpoint. I know
that many a city front lawn is small; but, if it is only fairly big,
a walk, cut curvingly, will add to it, surprisingly. That part of a
walk which runs to your front door could show rows of small rocks rough
and natural; and grading from small to big; but _no_ 'hit-or-miss'
layout. You can so fix up your yard as to form an approach to unity in
plan with such as adjoin you; though without actual duplication; thus
providing harmony for all who may pass by. It is, in fact, but a bit
of City Planning; and anybody who aids in such work is a most worthy
inhabitant. So, _cut_ your scraggly lawns! _Trim_ your old, shaggy
shrubs! Bring into artistic form, your grass-grown walks!"

(Now, naturally, in writing such a story as this, with its conditions
as laid down in its Introduction, it is not surprising that an
occasional "rough spot" in composition is found. So I trust that a
critical public will hold constantly in mind that I am voluntarily
avoiding words containing that symbol which is, _by far_, of most
common inclusion in writing our Anglo-Saxon as it is, today. Many of
our most common words cannot show; so I must adopt synonyms; and so
twist a thought around as to say what I wish with as much clarity as I
can.)

So, now to go on with this odd contraption:

By Autumn, a man who took his vacation in July, would hardly know his
town upon coming back, so thoroughly had thousands "dug in" to aid in
its transformation.

"Boys," said Gadsby, "you can pat your own backs, if you can't find
anybody to do it for you. This city is proud of you. And, girls, just
sing with joy; for not only is your city proud of you, but I am, too."

"But how about you, sir, and your work?"

This was from Frank; a boy brought up to think fairly on all things.
"Oh," said Gadsby laughingly, "I didn't do much of anything but boss
you young folks around. If our Council awards any diplomas, I don't
want any. I would look ridiculous strutting around with a diploma with
a pink ribbon on it, now wouldn't I!"

This talk of diplomas was as a bolt from a bright sky to this young,
hustling bunch. But, though Gadsby's words did sound as though a grown
man wouldn't want such a thing, that wasn't saying that a young boy or
girl wouldn't; and with this surprising possibility ranking in young
minds, many a kid was in an anti-soporific condition for parts of many
a night.

But a kindly Councilman actually did bring up a bill about this diploma
affair, and his collaborators put it through; which naturally brought
up talk as how to award such diplomas. At last it was thought that a
big public affair at City Hall, with our Organization on a platform,
with Branton Hills' Mayor and Council, would furnish an all-round,
satisfactory way.

Such an occasion was worthy of a lot of planning; and a first thought
was for flags and bunting on all public buildings; with a grand
illumination at night. Stationary lights should glow from all points
on which a light could stand, hang, or swing; and gigantic rays should
swoop and swish across clouds and sky. Bands should play; boys and
girls march and sing; and a vast crowd would pour into City Hall. As on
similar occasions, a bad rush for chairs was apt to occur, a company
of military units should occupy all important points, to hold back
anything simulating a jam.

Now, if you think our Organization wasn't all agog and wild, with
youthful anticipation at having a diploma for work out of school
hours, you just don't know Youth. Boys and girls, though not full
grown inhabitants of a city, do know what will add to its popularity;
and having had a part in bringing about such conditions, it was but
natural to look back upon such, as any military man might at winning a
difficult fight.

So, finally our big day was at hand! That it might not cut into school
hours, it was on a Saturday; and, by noon, about a thousand kids,
singing, shouting and waving flags, stood in formation at City Park,
awaiting, with growing thrills, a signal which would start as big a
turn-out as Branton Hills had known in all its history. Up at City
Hall awaiting arrivals of city officials, a big crowd sat; row upon
row of chairs which not only took up all floor room, but also many a
small spot, in door-way or on a balcony in which a chair or stool could
find footing; and all who could not find such an opportunity willingly
stood in back. Just as a group of officials sat down on that flag-bound
platform, distant throbbing of drums, and bright, snappy band music
told of Branton Hills' approaching thousands of kids, who, finally
marching in through City Hall's main door, stood in a solid mass around
that big room.

Naturally Gadsby had to put his satisfaction into words; and, advancing
to a mahogany stand, stood waiting for a storm of hand-clapping and
shouts to quit, and said:--

"Your Honor, Mayor of Branton Hills, its Council, and all you out in
front:--If you would only stop rating a child's ability by your own;
and try to find out just _what_ ability a child has, our young folks
throughout this big world would show a surprisingly willing disposition
to try things which would bring your approbation. A child's brain is an
astonishing thing. It has, in its construction, an astounding capacity
for absorbing what is brought to it; and not only to think about, but
to find ways for improving it. It is today's child who, tomorrow,
will, you know, laugh at our ways of doing things. So, in putting
across this campaign of building up our community into a municipality
which has won acclaim, not only from its officials and inhabitants,
but from surrounding towns I found, in our young folks, an out-and-out
inclination to assist; and you, today, can look upon it as labor in
which your adult aid was but a small factor. So now, my Organization of
Youth, if you will pass across this platform, your Mayor will hand you
your diplomas."

Not in all Branton Hills' history had any boy or girl known such a
thrill as upon winning that hard-won roll! And from solid banks of
humanity roars of congratulation burst forth. As soon as Mayor Brown
shook hands (and such tiny, warm, soft young hands, too!) with all, a
big out-door lunch was found waiting on a charming lawn back of City
Hall; and this was no World War mobilization lunch of doughnuts and a
hot dog sandwich; but, as two of Gadsby's sons said, was "an all-round,
good, big fill-up;" and many a boy's and girl's "tummy" was soon as
round and taut as a balloon.

As twilight was turning to dusk, boys in an adjoining lot shot skyward
a crashing bomb, announcing a grand illumination as a fitting climax
for so glorious a day; and thousands sat on rock-walls, grassy knolls,
in cars or at windows, with a big crowd standing along curbs and
crosswalks. Myriads of lights of all colors, in solid balls, sprays,
sparkling fountains, and bursts of glory, shot, in criss-cross paths,
up and down, back and forth, across a star-lit sky; providing a display
without a par in local annals.

But not only did Youth thrill at so fantastic a show. Adults had many a
Fourth of July brought back from a distant past; in which our national
custom wound up our most important holiday with a similar display;
only, in our Fourths of long ago, horrifying, gigantic concussions
would disturb old folks and invalids until midnight; at which hour,
according to law, all such carrying-on must stop. But did it? Possibly
in _your_ town, but not around _my_ district! All Fourth of July
outfits don't always function at first, you know; and no kid, (or
adult!) would think of quitting until that last pop should pop; or that
last bang should bang. And so, many a dawn on July fifth found things
still going, full blast.




III


Youth cannot stay for long in a condition of inactivity; and so, for
only about a month did things so stand, until a particularly bright
girl in our Organization, thought out a plan for caring for infants of
folks who had to go out, to work; and this bright kid soon had a group
of girls who would join, during vacation, in voluntarily giving up four
days a month to such work. With about fifty girls collaborating, all
districts had this most gracious aid; and a girl would not only watch
and guard, but would also instruct, as far as practical, any such tot
as had not had its first schooling. Such work by young girls still
in school was a grand thing; and Gadsby not only stood up for such
loyalty, but got at his boys to find a similar plan; and soon had a
full troop of Boy Scouts; uniforms and all. This automatically brought
about a Girl Scout unit; and, through a collaboration of both, a form
of club sprang up. It was a club in which any boy or girl of a family
owning a car would call mornings for pupils having no cars, during
school days, for a trip to school and back. This was not only a saving
in long walks for many, but also took from a young back, that hard,
tiring strain from lugging such armfuls of books as you find pupils
laboriously carrying, today. Upon arriving at a school building, many
cars would unload so many books that Gadsby said:--

"You would think that a Public Library branch was moving in!" This car
work soon brought up a thought of giving similar aid to ailing adults;
who, not owning a car, could not know of that vast display of hill and
plain so common to a majority of our townsfolks. So a plan was laid, by
which a car would call two days a month; and for an hour or so, follow
roads winding out of town and through woods, farm lands and suburbs;
showing distant ponds, and that grand arch of sky which "shut-ins"
know only from photographs. Ah; _how_ that plan did stir up joyous
anticipation amongst such as thus had an opportunity to call upon old,
loving pals, and talk of old customs and past days! Occasionally such a
talk would last so long that a youthful motorist, waiting dutifully at
a curb, thought that a full family history of both host and visitor was
up for an airing. But old folks always _will_ talk and it will not do a
boy or girl any harm to wait; for, you know, that boy or girl will act
in just that way, at a not too far-off day!

But, popular as this touring plan was, it had to stop; for school
again took all young folks from such out-door activity. Nobody was so
sorry at this as Gadsby, for though Branton Hills' suburban country is
glorious from March to August, it is also strong in its attractions
throughout Autumn, with its artistic colorings of fruits, pumpkins,
corn-shocks, hay-stacks and Fall blossoms. So Gadsby got a big
motor-coach company to run a bus a day, carrying, gratis, all poor or
sickly folks who had a doctor's affidavit that such an outing would aid
in curing ills arising from too constant in-door living; and so, up
almost to Thanksgiving, this big coach ran daily.

As Spring got around again, this "man-of-all-work" thought of driving
away a shut-in invalid's monotony by having musicians go to such rooms,
to play; or, by taking along a vocalist or trio, sing such old songs
as always bring back happy days. This work Gadsby thought of paying
for by putting on a circus. And _was_ it a circus? _It was!!_ It had
boys forming both front and hind limbs of animals totally unknown to
zoology; girls strutting around as gigantic birds of also doubtful
origin; an array of small living animals such as trick dogs and goats,
a dancing pony, a group of imitation Indians, cowboys, cowgirls, a
kicking trick jack-ass; and, talk about clowns! Forty boys got into
baggy pantaloons and fools' caps; and no circus, including that first
of all shows in Noah's Ark, had so much going on. Gymnasts from our
school gymnasium, tumbling, jumping and racing; comic dancing; a clown
band; high-swinging artists, and a funny cop who didn't wait to find
out who a man was, but hit him anyway. And, as no circus _is_ a circus
without boys shouting wildly about pop-corn and cold drinks, Gadsby saw
to it that such boys got in as many patrons' way as any ambitious youth
could; and that is "going strong," if you know boys, at all!

But what about profits? It not only paid for all acts which his
Organization couldn't put on, but it was found that a big fund for many
a day's musical visitations, was on hand.

And, now a word or two about municipal affairs in this city; or _any_
city, in which nobody will think of doing anything about its poor
and sick, without a vigorous prodding up. City Councils, now-a-days,
willingly grant big appropriations for paving, lights, schools, jails,
courts, and so on; but invariably fight shy of charity; which is
nothing but sympathy for anybody who is "down and out." No man can
say that Charity will not, during coming days, aid _him_ in supporting
his family; and it was Gadsby's claim that _humans_:--_not blocks of
buildings_, form what Mankind calls a city. But what would big, costly
buildings amount to, if all who work in such cannot maintain that good
physical condition paramount in carrying on a city's various forms of
labor? And not only _physical_ good, but also a mind happy from lack of
worry and of that stagnation which always follows a monotonous daily
grind. So our Organization was soon out again, agitating City Officials
and civilians toward building a big Auditorium in which all kinds of
shows and sports could occur, with also a swimming pool and hot and
cold baths. Such a building cannot so much as start without financial
backing; but gradually many an iron-bound bank account was drawn upon
(much as you pull a tooth!), to buy bonds. Also, such a building won't
grow up in a night; nor was a spot upon which to put it found without
a lot of agitation; many wanting it in a down-town district; and also,
many who had vacant land put forth all sorts of claims to obtain cash
for lots upon which a big tax was paid annually, without profits. But
all such things automatically turn out satisfactorily to a majority;
though an ugly, grasping landlord who lost out, would viciously squawk
that "municipal graft" was against him.

Now Gadsby was vigorously against graft; not only in city affairs but
in any kind of transaction; and that stab brought forth such a flow of
oratory from him, that as voting for Mayor was soon to occur, it, and a
long list of good works, soon had him up for that position. But Gadsby
didn't want such a nomination; still, thousands of townsfolks who had
known him from childhood, would not hark to anything but his candidacy;
and, soon, on window cards, signs, and flags across Broadway, was
his photograph and "GADSBY FOR MAYOR;" and a campaign was on which
still rings in Branton Hills' history as "hot stuff!" Four aspiring
politicians ran in opposition; and, as all had good backing, and Gadsby
only his public works to fall back on, things soon got looking gloomy
for him. His antagonists, standing upon soap box, auto truck, or
hastily built platforms, put forth, with prodigious vim, claims that
"our fair city will go back to its original oblivion if _I_ am not its
Mayor!" But our Organization now took a hand, most of which, now out of
High School, was growing up rapidly; and anybody who knows anything at
all about Branton Hills' history, knows that, if this band of bright,
loyal pals of Gadsby's was out to attain a goal, it was mighty apt to
start things humming. To say that Gadsby's rivals got a bad jolt as
it got around town that his "bunch of warriors" was aiding him, would
put it but mildly. _Two quit instantly_, saying that this is a day of
Youth and no adult has half a show against it! But two still hung on;
clinging to a sort of fond fantasy that Gadsby, not naturally a public
sort of man, might voluntarily drop out. But, had Gadsby so much as
thought of such an action, his Organization would quickly laugh it to
scorn.

"Why, good gracious!" said Frank Morgan, "if _anybody_ should sit in
that Mayor's chair in City Hall, it's you! Just look at what you did to
boost Branton Hills! Until you got it a-going it had but two thousand
inhabitants; now it has sixty thousand! And just ask your rivals to
point to any part of it that you didn't build up. Look at our Public
Library, municipal band, occupational class rooms; auto and bus trips;
and your circus which paid for music for sick folks. With you as Mayor,
_boy!_ What an opportunity to boss and swing things your own way! Why,
anything you might say is as good as law; and----"

"Now, hold on, boy!" said Gadsby, "a Mayor can't boss things in any
such a way as you think. A Mayor has a Council, which has to pass on
all bills brought up; and, my boy, upon arriving at manhood, you'll
find that a Mayor who _can_ boss a Council around, is a most uncommon
bird. And as for a Mayor's word amounting to a law, it's a mighty good
thing that it can't! Why, a Mayor can't do much of anything, today,
Frank, without a bunch of crazy bat-brains stirring up a rumpus about
his acts looking 'suspiciously shady.' Now that is a bad condition in
which to find a city, Frank. You boys don't know anything about graft;
but as you grow up you will find many flaws in a city's laws; but also
many points thoroughly good and fair. Just try to think what a city
would amount to if a solitary man could control its law making, as a
King or Sultan of old. That was why so many millions of inhabitants
would start wars and riots against a tyrant; for many a King _was_ a
tyrant, Frank, and had no thought as to how his laws would suit his
thousands of rich and poor. A law that might suit a rich man, might
work all kinds of havoc with a poor family."

"But," said Frank, "why should a King pass a law that would dissatisfy
anybody?"

Gadsby's parry to this rising youthful ambition for light on political
affairs was:--

"Why will a duck go into a pond?" and Frank found that though a growing
young man might know a thing or two, making laws for a city was a man's
job.

So, with a Mayoralty campaign on his hands, plus planning for that big
auditorium, Gadsby was as busy as a fly around a syrup jug; for a mass
of campaign mail had to go out; topics for orations thought up; and
contacts with his now truly important Organization of Youth, took so
many hours out of his days that his family hardly saw him, at all. Noon
naturally stood out as a good opportunity for oratory, as thousands,
out for lunch, would stop, in passing. But, also, many a hall rang with
plaudits as an antagonist won a point; but many a throng saw Gadsby's
good points, and plainly told him so by turning out voluminously at any
point at which his oratory was to flow. It was truly miraculous how
this man of shy disposition, found words in putting forth his plans for
improving Branton Hills, town of his birth. Many an orator has grown
up from an unassuming individual who had things worth saying; and who,
through that curious facility which is born of a conviction that his
plans had a practical basis, won many a ballot against such prolific
flows of high-sounding words as his antagonists had in stock. Many a
night Gadsby was "all in," as his worn-out body and an aching throat
sought his downy couch. No campaign is a cinch.

With so many minds amongst a city's population, just that many calls
for this or that swung back and forth until that most important of all
days,--voting day, was at hand. What crowds, mobs and jams did assail
all polling booths, casting ballots to land a party-man in City Hall!
If a voting booth was in a school building, as is a common custom
pupils had that day off; and, as Gadsby was Youth's champion, groups of
kids hung around, watching and hoping with that avidity so common with
youth, that Gadsby would win by a majority unknown in Branton Hills.
And Gadsby did!

As soon as it was shown by official count, Branton Hills was a riot,
from City Hall to City limits; throngs tramping around, tossing hats
aloft; for a hard-working man had won what many thousands thought was
fair and just.




IV


As soon as Gadsby's inauguration had put him in a position to do things
with authority, his first act was to start things moving on that big
auditorium plan, for which many capitalists had bought bonds. Again
public opinion had a lot to say as to how such a building should look,
what it should contain; how long, how high, how costly; with a long
string of ifs and buts.

Family upon family put forth claims for rooms for public forums in
which various thoughts upon world affairs could find opportunity for
discussion; Salvation Army officials thought that a big hall for a
public Sunday School class would do a lot of good; and that, lastly,
what I must, from this odd yarn's strict orthography, call a "film
show," should, without doubt occupy a part of such a building. Anyway,
talk or no talk, Gadsby said that it should stand as a building for
man, woman and child; rich or poor; and, barring its "film show,"
without cost to anybody. Branton Hills' folks could thus swim, do
gymnastics, talk on public affairs, or "just sit and gossip", at will.
So it was finally built in a charming park amidst shrubs and blossoms;
an additional honor for Gadsby.

But such buildings as Branton Hills now had could not fulfill all
functions of so rapidly growing a city; for you find, occasionally, a
class of folks who cannot afford a doctor, if ill. This was brought up
by a girl of our Organization, Doris Johnson, who, on Christmas Day, in
taking gifts to a poor family, had found a woman critically ill, and
with no funds for aid or comforts; and instantly, in Doris' quick young
mind a vision of a big city hospital took form; and, on a following day
Gadsby had his Organization at City Hall, to "just talk," (and you know
how that bunch _can_ talk!) to a Councilman or two.

Now, if any kind of a building in all this big world costs good, hard
cash to build, and furnish, it is a hospital; and it is also a building
which a public knows nothing about. So Mayor Gadsby saw that if his
Council would pass an appropriation for it, no such squabbling as had
struck his Municipal Auditorium plan, would occur. But Gadsby forgot
Branton Hills' landlords, all of whom had "a most glorious spot," just
right for a hospital; until, finally, a group of physicians was told to
look around. And did Branton Hills' landlords call upon Branton Hills'
physicians? I'll say so!! Anybody visiting town, not knowing what was
going on, would think that vacant land was as common as raindrops in a
cloudburst. Small plots sprang into public light which couldn't hold a
poultry barn, to say nothing of a big City Hospital. But no grasping
landlord can fool physicians in talking up a hospital location, so it
was finally built, on high land, with a charming vista across Branton
Hills' suburbs and distant hills; amongst which Gadsby's charity auto
and bus trips took so many happy invalids on past hot days.

Now it is only fair that our boys and girls of this famous Organization
of Youth, should walk forward for an introduction to you. So I will
bring forth such bright and loyal girls as Doris Johnson, Dorothy
Fitts, Lucy Donaldson, Marian Hopkins, Priscilla Standish, Abigail
Worthington, Sarah Young, and Virginia Adams. Amongst boys, cast
a fond look upon Arthur Rankin, Frank Morgan, John Hamilton, Paul
Johnson, Oscar Knott and William Snow; as smart a bunch of Youth as you
could find in a month of Sundays.

As soon as our big hospital was built and functioning, Sarah Young
and Priscilla Standish, in talking with groups of girls, had found
a longing for a night-school, as so many folks had to work all day,
so couldn't go to our Manual Training School. So Mayor Gadsby took
it up with Branton Hills' School Board. Now school boards do not
always think in harmony with Mayors and Councils; in fact, what with
school boards, Councils, taxation boards, paving contractors, Sunday
closing-hour agitations, railway rights of way, and all-round political
"mud-slinging," a Mayor has a tough job.

Two of Gadsby's School Board said "NO!!" A right out-loud, slam-bang
big "NO!!" Two thought that a night school was a good thing; but four,
with a faint glow of financial wisdom, (a rarity in politics, today!)
saw no cash in sight for such an institution.

But Gadsby's famous Organization won again! Branton Hills did not
contain a family in which this Organization wasn't known; and many a
sock was brought out from hiding, and many a sofa pillow cut into, to
aid _any_ plan in which this group had a part.

But, just as funds had grown to what Mayor Gadsby thought would fill
all such wants, a row in Council as to this fund's application got so
hot that "His Honor" got mad; _mighty mad!!_ And said:--

"Why is it that any bill for appropriations coming up in this Council
has to kick up such a rumpus? Why can't you look at such things with a
public mind; for nothing can so aid toward passing bills as harmony.
This city is not holding off an attacking army. Branton Hills is not
a pack of wild animals, snapping and snarling by day; jumping, at a
crackling twig, at night. It is a city of _humans_; animals, if you
wish, but with a gift from On High of a _brain_, so far apart from all
dumb animals as to allow us to talk about our public affairs calmly and
thoughtfully. All this Night School rumpus is foolish. Naturally, what
is taught in such a school is an important factor; so I want to find
out from our Organization----"

At this point, old Bill Simpkins got up, with:

"This Organization of Youth stuff puts a kink in my spinal column!
Almost all of it is through school. So how can you bring such a group
forward as 'pupils?'"

"A child," said Gadsby, "who had such schooling as Branton Hills
affords is, naturally, still a pupil; for many will follow up a study
if an opportunity is at hand. Many adults also carry out a custom
of brushing up on unfamiliar topics; thus, also, ranking as pupils.
Possibly, Bill, if you would look up that word 'pupil,' you wouldn't
find so much fault with insignificant data."

"All right!" was Simpkins' snap-back; "but what I want to know is,
what our big Public Library is for. Your 'pupils' can find all sorts
of information in that big building. So why build a night school? It's
nothing but a duplication!"

"A library," said Gadsby, "is not a school. It has no instructors; you
cannot talk in its rooms. You may find a book or two on your study, or
you may not. You would find it a big handicap if you think that you can
accomplish much with no aid but that of a Public Library. Young folks
know what young folks want to study. It is foolish, say, to install a
class in Astronomy, for although it _is_ a 'Night School,' its pupils'
thoughts might not turn toward Mars, Saturn or shooting stars; but
shorthand, including training for typists amongst adults who, naturally
don't go to day schools, is most important, today; also History and
Corporation Law; and I know that a study of Music would attract many.
Any man or woman who works all day, but still wants to study at night,
should find an opportunity for doing so."

This put a stop to Councilman Simpkins' criticisms, and approval was
put upon Gadsby's plan; and it was but shortly that this school's
popularity was shown in a most amusing way. Branton Hills folks, in
passing it on going out for a show or social call, caught most savory
whiffs, as its cooking class was producing doughnuts and biscuits;
for a Miss Chapman, long famous as a cook for Branton Hills' Woman's
Club, had about forty girls finding out about that magic art. So, too,
occasionally a cranky old Councilman, who had fought against "this
foolish night school proposition," would pass by; and, oh, hum!! A
Councilman is only an animal, you know; and, on cooking class nights,
such an animal, unavoidably drawn by that wafting aroma, would go in,
just a bit humiliatingly, and, in praising Miss Chapman for doing "such
important work for our young girls," would avidly munch a piping hot
biscuit or a sizzling doughnut from a young girl's hand, who, a month
ago, couldn't fry a slab of bacon without burning it.




V


Just as Gadsby was thinking nothing was now lacking in Branton Hills, a
child in a poor family got typhoid symptoms from drinking from a small
brook at a picnic and, without any aid from our famous Organization,
a public clamor was forthcoming for Municipal District Nursing, as
so many folks look with horror at going to a hospital. Now District
Nursing calls for no big appropriation; just salary, a first-aid
outfit, a supply of drugs and so forth; and, now-a-days, a car. And,
to Branton Hills' honor four girls who had had nursing training soon
brought, not only small comforts, but important ministrations to a
goodly part of our population. In districts without this important
municipal function, common colds may run into long-drawn-out attacks;
and contagion can not only shut up a school or two but badly handicap
all forms of public activity.

"Too many small towns," said Gadsby, "try to go without public nursing;
calling it foolish, and claiming that a family ought to look out for
its own sick. BUT! Should a high mortality, such as this Nation HAS
known, occur again, such towns will frantically broadcast a call for
girls with nursing training; and wish that a silly, cash-saving custom
hadn't brought such critical conditions."

At this point I want to bring forward an individual who has had a big
part in Branton Hills' growth; but who, up to now, has not shown up in
this history. You know that Gadsby had a family, naturally including a
woman; and that woman was fondly and popularly known throughout town
as Lady Gadsby; a rank fittingly matching Gadsby's "His Honor," upon
his inauguration as Mayor. Lady Gadsby was strongly in favor of all
kinds of clubs or associations; organizing a most worthy Charity Club,
a Book Club and a Political Auxiliary. It was but a natural growth from
Woman's part in politics, both municipal and National; and which, in
many a city, has had much to say toward nominations of good officials,
and running many a crook out of town; for no crook, nor "gang boss" can
hold out long if up against a strong Woman's Club. Though it was long
thought that woman's brain was minor in comparison with man's, woman,
as a class, now-a-day shows an all-round activity; and has brought
staid control to official actions which had had a long run through
domination by man;--that proud, cocky, strutting animal who thinks that
this gigantic world should hop, skip and jump at his commands. So,
from, or through just such clubs as Lady Gadsby's, Branton Hills was
soon attracting folks from surrounding districts; in fact, it was known
as a sort of Fairyland in which all things turn out satisfactorily.
This was, plainly, a condition which would call for much additional
building; which also brings additional tax inflow; so Branton Hills was
rapidly growing into a most important community. So, at a School Board
lunch, His Honor said:--

"I trust that now you will admit that what I said long ago about making
a city an attraction to tourists, is bringing daily confirmation. Oh,
what a lot of politically blind city and town officials I could point
out within a day's auto trip from Branton Hills! Many such an official,
upon winning a foothold in City Hall, thinks only of his own cohorts,
and his own gain. So it is not surprising that public affairs grow
stagnant. Truly, I cannot fathom such minds! I can think of nothing so
satisfying as doing public good in as many ways as an official can.
Think, for an instant, as to just what a city is. As I said long ago,
it is _not_ an array of buildings, parks and fountains. No. A city is a
living thing! It is, actually, _human_; for it is a group of humanity
growing up in daily contact; and if officials adopt as a slogan, "all
I can do," and not "all I can grab," only its suburban boundary can
limit its growth. Branton Hills attracts thousands, annually. All
of that influx looks for comforts, an opportunity to work, and good
schools. Branton Hills has all that; and I want to say that all who
visit us, with thoughts of joining us, will find us holding out a glad
hand; promising that all such fond outlooks will find confirmation at
any spot within cannon-shot of City Hall."

At this point, a woman from just such a group got up, saying:--

"I want to back up your mayor. On my first visit to your charming city
I saw an opportunity for my family; and, with woman's famous ability
for arguing, I got my husband to think as I do; and not an hour from
that day has brought us any dissatisfaction. Your schools stand high in
comparison with any out our way; your shops carry first-class goods,
your laws act without favoritism for anybody or class; and an air of
happy-go-lucky conditions actually shouts at you, from all parts of
town."

Now, as months slid past it got around to Night School graduation day;
and as it was this institution's first, all Branton Hills was on hand,
packing its big hall. An important part was a musical half-hour by
its big chorus, singing such grand compositions as arias from Faust,
Robin Hood, Aida, and Martha; also both boys' and girls' bands, both
brass and strings, doing first-class work on a Sousa march, a Strauss
waltz, and a potpourri of National airs from many lands, which brought
a storm of hand clapping; for no form of study will so aid youth in
living happily, as music. Ability to play or sing; to know what is good
or poor in music, instills into young folks a high quality of thought;
and, accuracy is found in its rigidity of rhythm.

As soon as this music class was through, Gadsby brought forth soloists,
duos and trios; violinists, pianists, and so many young musicians that
Branton Hills was as proud of its night school as a girl is of "that
first diamond." That brought our program around to introducing pupils
who had won honor marks: four girls in knitting, oil painting, cooking
and journalism; and four smart youths in brass work, wood-carving and
Corporation law. But pupils do not form all of a school body; so a
group of blushing instructors had to bow to an applauding roomful.

Though this was a school graduation, Mayor Gadsby said it would do no
harm to point out a plan for still adding to Branton Hills' public
spirit:--

"This town is too plain; too dingy. Brick walls and asphalt paving
do not light up a town, but dim it. So I want to plant all kinds of
growing things along many of our curbs. In our parks I want ponds
with gold fish, fancy ducks and big swans; row-boats, islands with
arbors, and lots of shrubs _that blossom_; not just an array of twigs
and stalks. I want, in our big City Park, a casino, dancing pavilion,
lunch rooms; and parking for as many cars as can crowd in. So I think
that all of us ought to pitch in and put a bright array of natural aids
round about; both in our shopping district and suburbs; for you know
that old saying, that 'a charming thing is a joy always.'"

So a miraculous transformation of any spot at all dull was soon a fact.
Oak, birch and poplar saplings stood along curbs and around railway
stations; girls brought in willow twigs, ivy roots, bulbs of canna,
dahlia, calladium, tulip, jonquil, gladiola and hyacinth. Boys also dug
many woodland shrubs which, standing along railway tracks, out of town,
took away that gloomy vista so commonly found upon approaching a big
city; and a long grassplot, with a rim of boxwood shrubs, was laid out,
half way from curb to curb on Broadway, in Branton Hills' financial
district. As Gadsby was looking at all this with happy satisfaction, a
bright lad from our Night School's radio class, told him that Branton
Hills should install a broadcasting station, as no city, today, would
think of trying to win additional population without that most
important adjunct for obtaining publicity. So any man or boy who had
any knack at radio was all agog; and about a thousand had ambitions for
a job in it, at which only about six can work. And City Hall had almost
a riot, as groups of politicians, pastors and clubs told just what such
a station should, and should not broadcast; for a broadcasting station,
with its vast opportunity for causing both satisfaction and antagonism,
must hold rigidly aloof from any racial favoritism, church, financial
or nationality criticisms; and such a policy is, as any broadcasting
station will admit, most difficult of adoption. First of all stood
that important position of what you might call "studio boss." Although
a man in control of a station is not known as "boss," I think it will
pass in this oddly built-up story. Now I am going to boost our famous
Organization again, by stating that a boy from its ranks, Frank Morgan,
was put in; for it was a hobby of Gadsby to put Branton Hills boys in
Branton Hills Municipal jobs. So Frank, right away, got all sorts of
calls for hours or half hours to broadcast "most astounding bargains"
in clothing, salad oils, motor oils, motor "gas", soaps, cars, and
tooth brush lubricants. With a big Fall campaign for Washington
officials about to start, such a position as Frank's was chuck full of
pitfalls; a stiff proposition for a young chap, not long out of High
School. But Gadsby took him in hand.

"Now, boy, hold your chin up, and you will find that most folks, though
cranky or stubborn at first, will follow your rulings if you insist,
in a civil way, that you know all our National Radio Commission's
laws binding your station. _Millions_, of all kinds, will dial in
your station; and what would highly satisfy a group in Colorado might
actually insult a man down in Florida; for radio's wings carry far. You
know I'll back you up, boy. But now, what would you call this station?"

"Oh," said our tyro-boss; "a radio station should work with initials
showing its location. So a Branton Hills station could stand as KBH."

Such initials, ringing with civic patriotism, hit Gadsby just right;
his Council put it in writing; and "Station KBH" was born! Though it
is not important to follow it from now on, I will say that our vast
country, by tuning in on KBH, found out a lot about this Utopia.

"You know that good old yarn," said Gadsby, "about making so good a
rat-trap that millions will tramp down your grass in making a path to
your front door."




VI


Now don't think that our famous Organization, having shown its worth on
so many occasions, sat down without thinking of doing anything again.
No, sir! Not _this_ bunch! If a boy or girl thought of any addition
to Branton Hills' popularity it was brought to Mayor Gadsby for
consultation. And so, as Lucy Donaldson on a trip through a patch of
woods, saw a big stag looking out from a clump of shrubs, nothing would
do but to rush to His Honor to pour what thoughts that charming sight
had brought up in this bright young mind. So, as Gadsby stood at City
Hall's front door, this palpitating, gushing young girl ran towards
him, panting and blowing from a long run:--

"I want a zoo!!"

"A WHAT?"

"A ZOO!! _You_ know! A park with stags and all kinds of wild animals;
and a duck pond, and--and--and----"

"Whoa! Slow down a bit! Do you want an actual zoo, or an outfit of toys
that wind up and growl?"

"I want a truly, out-and-out, big zoo. Why can't you build walls
around a part of City Park, and----"

Gadsby saw that this was an addition which nobody had thought of, until
now; so, grasping his young visitor's hand, joyfully, said:--

"It's a fact, Lucy!! And, as you thought of it, I'll call it,--now
wait;--what _shall_ I call it? Aha! That's it! I'll call it 'Lucy Zoo'.
How's that for quick thinking?"

"My! That's just grand; but what will Papa say?"

Now Gadsby had known Lucy's family from boyhood, so said:--

"You inform your dad that at any sign of balking by him, I'll put HIM
in Lucy Zoo, and pay a boy to prod him with a sharp stick, until his
approval is in my hands." This brought such a rollicking laugh that a
man mowing City Hall lawn had to laugh, too.

Now, (Ah! But I can't avoid saying it!) our Organization was out again;
but, now having grown a bit from such childish youths as had, at first
stood in its ranks, a boy, now approaching manhood, and a girl, now a
young woman, could solicit funds with an ability to talk knowingly in
favor of any factor that a hanging-back contributor could bring up in
running down such a proposition. You can always count on finding that
class in any city or town upon any occasion for public works; but I can
proudly say that many saw good in our Organization's plan; and Lucy
soon found that out, in Old Lady Flanagan.

"Whoops! A zoo, is it? And pray, phwat can't thot crazy Gadsby think
up? If our big Mayor had four sich bys as I brought into this woild;
worra, worra! his parlor, halls, dinin' room an' back yard 'd furnish
him wid a zoo, all right! Wid two always a-scrappin' about a ball bat
or a sling shot; a brat continually a-bawlin' about nuthin'; an' a baby
wid whoopin' cough, _I_ know phwat a zoo is, widout goin' to City Park
to gawk at a indigo baboon, or a pink tom cat."

"But," said Lucy, trying hard not to laugh; "Mayor Gadsby isn't
thinking of putting in pink tom cats, nor any kind of tom cats in this
zoo. It is for only _wild_ animals."

"WILD!! Say, if you could look into my back door as Old Man Flanagan
quits work, an' brings back a load o' grog, you'd find thot you had
wild animals roight in this town, all roight, all roight."

But, as on so many occasions, this charming girl got a contribution,
with Old Lady Flanagan calling out from a front window:--

"Good luck, Lucy darlin'! I'm sorry I was so dom cranky!"

But though popular opinion was in favor of having a zoo, popular
opinion didn't hand in donations to within four thousand dollars of
what it would cost to install; and Gadsby and his "gang" had to do a
bit of brain racking, so as not to disappoint lots of good folks who
_had_ paid in. Finally, Sarah Young thought of a rich woman living just
across from City Park. This woman, Lady Standish, was of that kind,
loving disposition which would bring in a cold, hungry, lost pup, or
cat, and fill it up with hot food and milk. Branton Hills kids could
bring any kind of a hurt or sick animal or bird; and Sarah had long
known that that back yard was, actually, a small zoo, anyway; with
dogs, cats, poultry, two robins too young to fly, four sparrows and
a canary, almost bald. Sarah thought that any woman, loving animals
as Lady Standish did, might just thrill at having a big zoo-ful right
at hand. So, saying, "I'll go and find out, right now," was off as an
arrow from a bow. As soon as this kindly woman found out what was on
Sarah's mind, our young solicitor got a loving kiss, with:--

"A zoo! Oh! how truly charming! What _grand_ things Mayor Gadsby
can think up without half trying!" And Sarah had to grin, thinking
of Lucy, and Old Lady Flanagan's opinion of His Honor! "You may not
know it, Sarah," said Lady Standish, "but John Gadsby and I had a big
flirtation, way back in our school days. And HOW downcast poor Johnny
was at my finding a husband out of town! But that was long, long ago,
darling. So, just to sort of pacify my old pal, John, I'll gladly put
up your missing four thousand; and you go to His Honor and say that I
wish him all sorts of good luck with this plan."

Now, Olympic champions must train continuously, but, customarily, in
gymnasiums. But today, folks in Branton Hills' shopping district had to
turn and gasp; for a young woman was sprinting wildly toward City Hall;
for Sarah was in a hurry. Gadsby was just coming out, as this girl, as
badly blown as Lucy was in asking for a zoo, ran up, calling out:--

"I GOT IT!! I GOT IT!!"

"Got what? A fit?"

"No! I got that final four thousand dollars! It's from Lady Standish,
who says that way back in school days, you and----"

"Whoa!! That was back in _history!_" but Gadsby was blushing, and Sarah
was winking, coyly.

Now Gadsby was as fond of his Organization boys and girls as of his
own; and Sarah was so radiantly happy that all His Honor could say
was:--

"My, now, Sarah! That's mighty good work! And as I told Lucy I'd call
our zoo Lucy Zoo for thinking of it, I'll find a way to honor you, too.
Aha! I'll put up a big arch, through which all visitors must pass, and
call it 'Sarah Young's Rainbow Arch.' How's that?"

Now Sarah had a bit of natural wit; so quickly said:--

"That's just grand if you'll bury that famous pot of gold at its foot,
so I can dig it up!"




VII


Now that a Zoo was actually on its way, Gadsby had to call in various
groups to talk about what a Zoo should contain. Now, you know that
_all_ animals can't find room in this orthographically odd story; so,
if you visit Lucy Zoo, you'll miss a customary inhabitant, or two. But
you'll find an array worthy of your trip. So a call was put in two big
daily journals, asking for bids on animals and birds; and soon, from
north, south and criss-cross points, a hunting party or a city with
too many zoo animals on hand got in touch with Branton Hills, with
proposals for all kinds of animals, from kangaroos to bats; and our
Organization had a lot of fun planning how many it could crowd into
City Park, without crowding out visitors. Finally a ballot put Lucy's
zoological population as follows:--

First, according to Lucy, "an awfully, AWFULLY big hippopotamus, with
a pool for its comfort;" a yak, caribou, walrus, (also with a pool,) a
long fox-run, bisons, gnus, stags, (it was a stag, you know, that got
this zoo plan going!), alligators, mountain lions, African lions, wild
cats, wild boars, llamas, gorillas, baboons, orang-outangs, mandrils;
_and_, according to Gadsby's boys, a "big gang" of that amusing, tiny
mimic always found accompanying hand-organs. Also an aviary, containing
condors, buzzards, parrots, ibis, macaws, adjutant birds, storks, owls,
quail, falcons, tiny humming birds, a sprinkling of hawks, mocking
birds, swans, fancy ducks, toucans; and a host of small singing birds;
and oh! without fail, an ostrich family; and, last, but most important
of all, a big first cousin of old Jumbo! A big glass building would
hold boa constrictors, pythons, cobras, lizards, and so forth; and down
in back of all this, an outdoor aquarium, full of goldfish, rainbow
trout, various fancy fish and blossoming aquatic plants. All in all it
would furnish a mighty amusing and popular spot which would draw lots
of out-of-town visitors; and visitors, you know, _might_ turn into
inhabitants! And so things finally got around to Inauguration Day; and,
knowing that no kid could sit still in school on such an occasion, it
was put down for a Saturday; and, so many happy, shouting, hopping,
jumping kids stood waiting for His Honor to cut a satin ribbon in front
of Sarah Young's Rainbow Arch, that grown folks had to wait, four
blocks back. As Gadsby was roaming around with Lucy, to find if things
should start moving, old Pat Ryan, from Branton Hills' railway station,
was hunting for him; finally locating him in a lunch room, and rushing
in with:--

"Say! That big hop-skip-and-jump artist is down in my trunk room! I got
a punch on my jaw, a crack on my snout, and a kick on my shins a-tryin'
to calm him down!"

"A kick and a punch? What actions!" said Gadsby. "I don't know of any
hop-skip-and-jump artist. How big a man is it?"

"Worra, worra! It ain't no man at all, at all! It's that thing what
grows in Australia, and--"

But Lucy saw light right off; and "laughing fit to kill," said:--

"Oh, ho, ho!! _I_ know! It's that boxing kangaroo you bought from
Barnum's circus!" and a charming girl was doubling up in a wild storm
of giggling, ignoring old Pat's scowls.

"Ah! That's him, all right," said Gadsby. "So, Pat, just put him in a
burlap bag and ship him to this zoo."

"Who? _I_ put him in a burlap bag? Say, boss! If I can pick up about
six husky guys around that station; and if I can find a _canvas_, not
a burlap, bag; and put on a gas mask, a stomach pad, two shin-guards,
and----"

But that crowd at Sarah's Arch was shouting for Gadsby to cut that
ribbon so old Pat had to bag that Australian tornado; and in a way
that would not hurt him; for kangaroo actors cost good cash, you know.

So that crowd of kids got in, at last! Now zoo animals can think, just
as humans can; and it was amusing to watch a pair of boys staring at a
pair of orang-outangs; and a pair of orang-outangs staring back at a
pair of boys; both thinking, no doubt, what funny things it saw! And,
occasionally, both animal and boy won a point! Now if you think that
only young folks find any fun in going to a zoo, you probably don't
go to zoos much; for many a big, rotund capitalist had to laugh at
simian antics, though, probably figuring up just how much satisfaction
his cash contribution brought him. Many a family woman forgot such
things as a finicky child or burning biscuits. All was happy-go-lucky
joy; and, at two o'clock, as Branton Hills' Municipal Band, (a part of
Gadsby's Organization of Youth's work, you know) struck up a bright
march, not a glum physiognomy was found in all that big park.

Gadsby and Lucy had much curiosity in watching what such crashing
music would do to various animals. At first a spirit akin to worry
had baboons, gorillas, and such, staring about, as still as so many
posts; until, finding that no harm was coming from such sounds, soon
took to climbing and swinging again. Stags, yaks and llamas did a bit
of high-kicking at first; Gadsby figuring that drums, and not actual
music, did it. But a lilting waltzing aria did not worry any part of
this big zoo family; in fact, a fox, wolf and jackal, in a quandary at
first actually lay down, as though music truly "hath charms to calm a
wild bosom."

At Gadsby's big aquarium visitors found not only fun, but opportunity
for studying many a kind of fish not ordinarily found in frying pans;
and, though in many lands, snails form a popular food, Lucy, Sarah and
Virginia put on furious scowls at a group of boys who thought "Snails
might go good, with a nut-pick handy." (But boys always _will_ say
things to horrify girls, you know.) And upon coming to that big glass
building, with its boa constrictors, alligators, lizards and so on,
a boy grinningly "got a girl's goat" by wanting to kiss a fifty-foot
anaconda; causing Lucy to say, haughtily, that "No boy, wanting to kiss
such horrid, wriggly things can kiss us Branton Hills girls." (Good for
you, Lucy! I'd pass up a _sixty_-foot anaconda, any day, for _you_.)

In following months many a school class was shown through our zoo's
fascinating paths, as instructors told of this or that animal's habits
and natural haunts; and showing that it was as worthy of sympathy,
if ill, as any human. And not only did such pupils obtain kindly
thoughts for zoo animals, but cats, dogs and all kinds of farm stock
soon found that things had an uncommon look, through a dropping off in
scoldings and whippings, and rapidly improving living conditions. But
most important of all was word from an ugly, hard-looking woman, who,
watching, with an apologizing sniff, a flock of happy birds, said:--

"I'm sorry that I always slap and bawl out my kids so much, for I know,
now, that kids or animals won't do as you wish if you snap and growl
too much. And I trust that Mayor Gadsby knows what a lot of good all
his public works do for us."

Now this is a most satisfactory and important thing to think about, for
brutality will not,--_cannot_,--accomplish what a kindly disposition
will; and, if folks could only know how quickly a "balky" child will,
through loving and cuddling, grow into a charming, happy youth, much
childish gloom and sorrow would vanish; for a man or woman who is ugly
to a child is too low to rank as highly as a wild animal; for no animal
will stand, for an instant, anything approaching an attack, or any form
of harm to its young. But what a lot of tots find slaps, yanks and
hard words for conditions which do not call for such harsh tactics!
_No_ child is naturally ugly or "cranky." And big, gulping sobs, or
sad, unhappy young minds, in a tiny body should _not_ occur in any
community of civilization. Adulthood holds many an opportunity for such
conditions. Childhood should not.

Now just a word about zoos. Many folks think that animals in a zoo know
no comforts; nothing but constant fright from living in captivity.
Such folks do not stop to think of a thing or two about an animal's
wild condition. Wild animals must not only constantly hunt for food,
but invariably fight to kill it and to _hold_ it, too; for, in such a
fight, a big antagonist will naturally win from a small individual.
Thus, what food is found, is also lost; and hunting must go on, day by
day, or night by night until a tragic climax--by thirst or starvation.
But in a zoo, food is brought daily, with facility for drinking, and
laid right in front of hoofs, paws or bills. For small animals, roofs
and thick walls ward off cold winds and rain; and so, days of calm
inactivity, daily naps without worrying about attack; and a carting
away of all rubbish and filth soon puts a zoo animal in bodily form
which has no comparison with its wild condition. Lack of room in which
to climb, roam or play, _may_ bring a zoo animal to that condition
known as "soft"; but, as it now has no call for vigor, and its fighting
passions find no opportunity for display, such an animal is gradually
approaching that condition which has brought Man, who is only an
animal, anyway, to his lofty point in Natural History, today. Truly,
with such tribulations, worry, and hard work as Man puts up with to
obtain his food and lodging, a zoo animal, if it could only know of our
daily grind, would comfortably yawn, thankful that Man is so kindly
looking out for it. With similar animals all around it, and, day by
day, just a happy growth from cub-hood to maturity, I almost wish that
I was a zoo animal, with no boss to growl about my not showing up,
mornings, at a customary hour!




VIII


Now, as our Organization of Youth is rapidly growing up, a _young_
crowd, too young to join it at first, is coming up; imbibing its
"why-not-do-it-now?" spirit. So, as Gadsby stood in front of that big
Municipal Auditorium (which that group, you know, had had built),
Marian Hopkins, a small girl, in passing by, saw him, and said:--

"I think Branton Hills ought to buy a balloon."

"Balloon? Balloon? What would this city do with a balloon? Put a string
on it so you could run around with it?"

"No; not that kind of a balloon, but that big, zooming kind that sails
way up high, with a man in it."

"Oh! Ha, ha! You think an air-craft is a balloon! But what would--Aha!
An airport?"

"Uh-huh; but I didn't know how to say it."

"By cracky!" said His Honor. "I thought this town was about through
improving. But an airport _would_ add a bit to it; now wouldn't it?"

Marian had a most profound opinion that it would; (if profound opinions
grow in such small kids!) so both took a walk to City Hall to hunt up
a Councilman or two. Finding four in a Council room, Gadsby said:--

"Youth, or, I should say, childhood, has just shown that Branton Hills
is shy on a most important acquisition," and Old Bill Simpkins just
_had_ to blurt out:--

"And, naturally, it calls for cash! CASH! CASH! CASH!! What will this
town amount to if it blows in dollars so fast?"

"And," said Gadsby, "what will it amount to, if it don't?"

That put a gag on Old Bill. Councilman Banks, though, was curious to
know about Marian's proposition, saying:--

"It is probably a plan for buying Christmas toys for all Branton Hills
kids."

But tiny Marian, with a vigorous stamp of a tiny foot, swung right back
with:--

"NO, SIR!! Santa Claus will bring us our gifts! But I thought of having
a--what did you call it, Mayor Gadsby?"

"This child thinks Branton Hills should build an airport, and I think
so, too. If our inhabitants, such as this tot, can think up such
things, all adults should pack up, and vanish from municipal affairs.
All right, Marian; our City Council, _your_ City Council, my young
patriot, will look into this airport plan for you."

So, as on similar occasions months ago, word that land was again
cropping up in Gadsby's mind, brought out a flood of landlords with
vacant lots, all looking forward to disposing of a dump worth two
dollars and a half, for fifty thousand. Now an airport must occupy a
vast lot of land, so cannot stand right in a City's shopping district;
but finally a big tract was bought, and right in back of tiny Marian's
back yard! Instantly, City Hall was full of applicants for flying
Branton Hills' first aircraft. To Gadsby's joy, amongst that bunch was
Harold Thompson, an old Organization lad, who was known around town as
a chap who could do about anything calling for brains. As an airport
is not laid out in a day, Harold got busy with paid aviators and soon
was piloting a craft without aid; and not only Branton Hills folks, but
old aviators, saw in Harold, a "bird-man" of no small ability. And so
tiny Marian's "vision" was a fact; just as "big girl" Lucy's Zoo; and,
as with all big City affairs, an Inauguration should start it off. Now,
on all such affairs you always find a "visitor of honor"; and on this
grand day Gadsby couldn't think of anybody for that important post but
Marian. And, as it would occur in August, any day would do, as that is
a school vacation month.

And what a _mob_ stood, or sat, on that big airport, waiting for a
signal from young Marian which would start Harold aloft, on Branton
Hills' initial flight! Almost all brought a lunch and camp-stools or
folding chairs; and, as it was a hot day, thousands of gay parasols,
and an array of bright clothing on our school-girls, had that big lot
looking as brilliant as a florist's window at Christmas.

Our young visitor of honor was all agog with joy; and, I think,
possibly a touch of vanity; for what child _wouldn't_ thrill with
thousands watching? But though Marian had always had good clothing,
coming from a family who could afford it, _no_ tot, in all history, had
so glorious an outfit as that which about all Branton Hills' population
saw on that platform, amidst flags, bunting and our big Municipal Band.
As an airship is a simulation of a bird; and as a bird, to a child, is
not far from a fairy, Marian had gaudy fairy wings, a radiant cloak of
gold, a sparkling gown all aglow with twinkling stars, and a long glass
wand, with a star at its top. As soon as all was in condition Gadsby
told Marian to stand up. This brought that vast crowd up, also; and
Gadsby said:--

"Now hold your wand way up high, and swing it, to signal Harold to
start."

Up shot a tiny arm; and Harold, watching from his cockpit, sang
out:--"CONTACT!!"

A vigorous twist of his ship's gigantic "fan" a shout, a roar, a whizz,
a mighty cloud of dust, and amid a tornado of clapping, shouts, and
band music, Branton Hills was put on aviation's map. Way, way up, so
far as to look as small as a toy, Harold put on a show of banking,
rolling and diving, which told Gadsby that, still again, had Branton
Hills found profit in what its Organization of Youth, _and, now, its
small kids_, had to say about improving a town.

During that box-lunch picnic, many of our "big girls" brought so much
food to Marian that Dad and Ma had to stand guard against tummy pains.
And what a glorious, jolly occasion that picnic was! Gay band music,
songs, dancing, oratory; and a grand all-round "howdy" amongst old
inhabitants and arriving tourists soon was transforming that big crowd
into a happy group, such as it is hard to find, today, in any big city;
cold, distant, and with no thought by its politicians for anybody in
it; and Gadsby found, around that big airport, many a man, woman and
child who was as proud of him as was his own family.




IX


I think that now you should know this charming Gadsby family; so I will
bring forth Lady Gadsby, about whom I told you at Gadsby's inauguration
as Mayor; a loyal church woman with a vocal ability for choir work;
and, with good capability on piano or organ, no woman could "fill in"
in so many ways; and no woman was so willing, and quick to do so.
Gadsby had two sons; bright lads and popular with all. Julius was of
a studious turn of mind, always poring through books of information;
caring not what kind of information it was, so long as it was
information, and not fiction. Gadsby had thought of his growing up as a
school instructor, for no work is so worthy as imparting what you know
to any who long to study. But William! Oh, hum!! Our Mayor and Lady
Gadsby didn't know just _what_ to do with him; for all his thoughts
clung around girls and fashions in clothing. Probably our High School
didn't contain a girl who didn't think that, at no distant day, Bill
Gadsby would turn, from a callow youth, into a "big catch" husband; for
a Mayor's son in so important a city as ours was a mark for any girl
to shoot at. But Bill was not of a marrying disposition; loving girls
just _as_ girls, but holding out no hand to any in particular. Always
in first class togs, without missing a solitary fad which a young man
should adopt, Gadsby's Bill was a lion, in his own right, with no girl
in sight who had that tact through which a lasso could land around his
manly throat. Gadsby had many a laugh, looking back at his own boyhood
days, his various flirtations and such wild, throbbing palpitations as
a boy's flirtations can instill; and looking back through just such
ogling groups as now sought his offspring; until a girl, oh, _so_ long
ago, had put a stop to all such flirtations, and got that lasso on
"with a strangling hold," as Gadsby says; and it is still on, today! But
this family was not all boys. Oh, my, no! Two girls also sat around
that family board. First, following William, was Nancy, who, as Gadsby
laughingly said, "didn't know how to grow;" and now, in High School,
was "about as big as a pint of milk;" and of such outstanding charm
that Gadsby continually got solicitations to allow photographing for
soft-drink and similar billboard displays.

"No, sir!! Not for any sort of pay!! In allowing public distribution
of a girl's photo you don't know into what situations said photos will
land. I find, daily, photographs of girls blowing about vacant lots,
all soggy from rains; also in a ditch, with its customary filth; or
stuck up on a brick wall or drawn onto an imaginary body showing a
brand of tights or pajamas. _No, sir!!_ Not for _my_ girl!!"

Fourth in this popular family was Kathlyn, of what is known as a
"classical mold;" with a brain which, at no distant day, will rank high
in Biology and Microscopy; for Kathlyn was of that sort which finds
fascination in studying out many whats and whys amongst that vast array
of facts about our origin. This study, which too many young folks avoid
as not having practical worth had a strong hold on Kathlyn, who could
not sanction such frivolous occupations as cards, dancing, or plain
school gossip. Not for an instant! Kathlyn thought that such folks
had no thoughts for anything but transitory thrills. But in Biology!!
Ah!! Why not study it, and find out how a tiny, microscopic drop of
protoplasm, can, through unknown laws grow into living organisms, which
can not only go on living, but can also bring forth offspring of its
kind? And not only that. As said offspring must combat various kinds of
surroundings and try various foods, why not watch odd variations occur,
and follow along, until you find an animal, bird, plant or bug of such
a total dissimilarity as to form practically, a class actually apart
from its original form? Kathlyn did just that; and Gadsby was proud of
it; and I think, just a bit curious on his own part as to occasional
illustrations in this studious young lady's school books!

Now it is known by all such natural "faddists" that any such a study
has points in common with a branch akin to it; and Kathlyn was not long
in finding out that Biology, with its facts of animal origin, could
apply to a practical control of bugs on farms. (This word, "bugs," is
hardly Biological; but as Kathlyn is in this story, with its strict
orthographical taboo, "bugs" must unavoidably supplant any classical
nomination for such things.)

So, Mayor Gadsby sought Branton Hills' Council's approval for a goodly
sum; not only for such control, but also for study as to how to plant,
in ordinary soil, and not risk losing half a crop from worms, slugs
and our awkwardly-brought-in "bugs." This appropriation was a sort of
prod, showing this Council that publicity of any first-class kind was
good for a city; and was casting about for anything which would so
act, until Gadsby's son, Bill, (who, you know, thought of nothing but
girls and "dolling up,") found that Branton Hills had no distinction
of its own in outfits for man or woman, so why not put up a goal of,
say fifty dollars, for anybody who could think up any worthy "stunt"
in clothing; which should go out as "Branton Hills' This" or "Branton
Hills' That." Possibly just a form of hat-brim, a cut of coat-front,
or a sporting outfit. And our worthy Council did put up that goal, and
many brought all sorts of plans to City Hall. And Bill won, by thinking
up a girls' (always girls, with Bill!) hiking outfit, consisting of a
skirt with a rain-proof lining, which could, during a storm, form a
rain-suit by putting it on, as Bill said, "by substituting outwards for
inwards." (This will hit Bill amusingly, as days go by!) Going with it
was a shirt with a similar "turn-out" facility, and a hiking boot with
high tops as guards against thorns and burs; but which, by undoing a
clasp, would slip off; and, LO!! you had a low-cut Oxford for ordinary
occasions! In about a month a big cotton mill had work going full blast
on "Branton Hills' Turn-it-out Sport and Hiking Outfit," and a small
boot-shop got out a pair of Bill's "two-part boots," though saying
that it would "probably fall apart without warning!" But Kathlyn put
on a pair and found it most satisfactory for a long, rough hill-climb,
hunting for bird and animal forms for Biological study. This proof of
Branton Hills' goods was soon known in surrounding towns, and that
critical boot-shop and big cotton mill had hard work to fill calls
from Canada, Holland, Russia, Spain and Australia! And Bill was put upon
Branton Hills' Roll of Honor.




X


Now I'll drop civic affairs for a bit, and go on to a most natural
act in this city of many young chaps and charming young girls which
was slowly working up all through this history, as Mayor Gadsby had
occasion to find out, sitting comfortably on his porch on a hot, sultry
August night. Amidst blossoming shrubs, a dim form slowly trod up his
winding pathway. It was a young man, plainly trying to act calmly, but
couldn't. It was Frank Morgan, our radio broadcasting "boss", you know,
who, for many a month, had shown what a romantic public calls "a crush"
for Gadsby's young Nancy.

So a jolly call of:--"What's on your mind, boy?" rang out, as Frank
sank wiltingly into a hammock, wiping his brow of what I _actually_
know was _not_ natural humidity from an August night! Now Gadsby, who
was, as I said, a gay Lothario in his own youth, saw right off what
was coming, and sat back, waiting. Finally, finishing a bad attack of
coughing, (though Frank hadn't any cold!), that young man said:--

"I,--that is, Nancy and I,--or, I will say that I want to,--that is,--I
think Nancy and I would--" and Gadsby took pity on him, right off.

Nancy had always had a strong liking for Frank. Both had grown up in
Branton Hills from babyhood; and Gadsby thought back about that lasso
which had brought him Lady Gadsby. Now asking a girl's Dad for that
young lady's hand is no snap for any young swain; and Gadsby was just
that kind of a Dad who would smooth out any bumps or rough spots in
such a young swain's path. Nancy wasn't a child, now, but a grown-up
young woman; so Gadsby said:--

"Frank, Lady Gadsby and I know all about how much you think of Nancy;
and what Nancy thinks of you. So, if you want to marry, our full wish
is for a long and happy union. Nancy is out in that arbor, down this
back path; and I'll watch that nobody disturbs you two for an hour."

At this grand turn of affairs, Frank could only gasp:--"OH-H-H!!" and
a shadowy form shot down that dusky path; and from that moonlit arbor,
anybody knowing how a man chirps to a canary bird, would know that two
young birds put a binding approval upon what His Honor had just said!!

Many a man has known that startling instant in which Dan Cupid, that
busy young rascal, took things in hand, and told him that his baby
girl was not a baby girl now, and was about to fly away from him. It
is both a happy and a sad thrill that shoots through a man at such an
instant. Happy and joyous at his girl's arrival at maturity; sad, as
it brings to mind that awkward fact that his own youth is now but a
myth; and that his scalp is showing vacant spots. His baby girl in a
bridal gown! His baby girl a Matron! His baby girl proudly placing a
_grandchild_ in his lap!! It's an impossibility!! But this big world
is full of this kind of impossibility, and will stay so as long as Man
lasts.

So Nancy, tiny, happy, laughing Nancy, was "found" through a conspiracy
by Dan Cupid and Frank Morgan; and right in all glory of youth.
_Youth!!_ Ah, what a word!! And how transitory! But, how grand! as long
as it lasts. How many millions in gold would pour out for an ability to
call it all back, as with our musical myth, Faust. During that magic
part of a child's growth this world is just a gigantic inquiry box,
containing many a topic for which a solution is paramount to a growing
mind. And to whom can a child look, but us adults? Any man who "can't
stop now" to talk with a child upon a topic which, to him is "too silly
for anything," should look back to that day upon which _that_ topic
was dark and dubious in his own brain. A child who asks nothing will
know nothing. That is why that "bump of inquiry" was put on top of our
skulls.




XI


But to go back to Nancy. It was in August that Frank had stumblingly
told Gadsby of his troth; and so, along in April, Branton Hills was
told that a grand church ritual would occur in May. May, with its
blossoms, birds and balmy air! An idyllic month for matrimony. I wish
that I could call this grand church affair by its common, customary
nomination; but that word can't possibly crowd into _this_ story. It
must pass simply as a church ritual.

All right; so far, so good. So, along into April all Branton Hills was
agog, awaiting information as to that actual day; or, I should say,
night.

Gadsby's old Organization of Youth was still as loyal to all in it as
it was, way back in days of its formation; days of almost constantly
running around town, soliciting funds for many a good Municipal
activity. Finally this group got cards announcing that on May Fourth,
Branton Hills' First Church would admit all who might wish to aid in
starting Nancy and Frank upon that glamorous path to matrimonial bliss.

May Fourth was punctual in arriving; though many a young girl got into
that flighty condition in which a month drags along as though in
irons, and clock-hands look as if stuck fast. But to many girls, also,
May Fourth was not any too far away; for charming gowns and dainty
hats do not grow upon shrubs, you know; and girls who work all day
must hurry at night, at manipulating a thousand or so things which go
towards adorning our girls of today.

Now, an approach to a young girl's "big day" is not always as that
girl might wish. Small things bob up, which, at first, look actually
disastrous for a joyous occasion; and for Nancy and Frank, just such a
thing did bob up; for, on May Third, a pouring rain and whistling wind
put Branton Hills' spirits way, way down into a sorrowful slump. Black,
ugly, rumbling clouds hung aggravatingly about in a saturation of mist,
rain and fog; and roads and lawns got such a washing that Nancy said:--

"Anyway, if I can't _walk_ across that front church yard, I can _swim
it!!_"

That was Nancy; a small bunch of inborn good humor; and I'll say, right
now, that it _took_ good humor, and lots of it, to look upon conditions
out of your control, with such outstanding pluck!

But young Dan Cupid was still around, and got in touch with that
tyrannical mythological god who controls storms; and put forth such
a convincing account of all Nancy's good points, (and Frank's too, if
anybody should ask you) that a command rang out across a stormy sky:--

"Calling all clouds!! Calling all clouds!! All rain to stop at midnight
of May Third! Bright Sun on May Fourth, and no wind!!"

So, as Nancy took an anxious squint out of doors at about six o'clock
on that important morning, (and what young girl _could_ go on, calmly
snoozing on such a day?) Lo!! Old Sol was smiling brightly down on
Branton Hills; birds sang; all sorts of blossoming things had had a
good drink; and a most _glorious_ sky, rid of all ugly clouds, put our
young lady into such a happy mood that it took a lot of control to
avoid just a tiny bit of humidity around a small pair of rich, brown
orbs which always had that vibrating, dancing light of happy youth;
that miraculous "joy of living."

And, _what_ a circus was soon going full tilt in Mayor Gadsby's
mansion! If that happy man so much as said:--"Now, I----" a grand,
womanly chorus told him that "a man don't know anything about such
affairs;" and that a most satisfactory spot for him was in a hammock
on his porch, with a good cigar! That's it! A man is nominally monarch
in his own family; but _only_ so on that outstanding day upon which
a bridal gown is laid out in all its glory on his parlor sofa, and a
small mob of girls, and occasionally a woman or two, is rushing in and
out, up and down stairs, and finding as much to do as a commonly known
microscopic "bug" of prodigious hopping ability finds at a dog show.
_Rush! rush! rush!_ A thousand thoughts and a million words, (this
crowd was all girls, you know!) making that parlor as noisy as a saw
mill! But Gadsby laughingly staid out of it all, watching big armfuls
of bloom and many a curious looking box go in through that front door;
flying hands rapidly untying glorious ribbon wrappings.

Now, upon all such occasions you will find, if you snoop around in
dining room or pantry, an astonishing loaf of culinary art, all fancy
frosting, and chuck full of raisins and citron, which is always cut
upon such an auspicious occasion; and it is as hard to avoid naming it,
in this story, as it is to withstand its assault upon your stomach.

Oh hum! Now what? Aha! May Fourth, lasting, as Nancy said, "for about
a million months," finally got Gadsby's dining room clock around
to six-fifty; only about an hour, now, to that grand march past
practically half of Branton Hills' population; for all who couldn't jam
into that commodious church would stand around in a solid phalanx,
blocking all traffic in that part of town; for all Branton Hills was
fond of its Mayor's "baby girl."

But, during this rush and hubbub, how about Frank? Poor boy! Now,
if you think that a young lad at such an instant is as calm as a
mill-pond, you don't know romantic Youth, that's all. About forty of
Gadsby's old Organization boys, now manly young chaps, had bought him a
car, which Nancy was _not_ to know anything about until that throwing
of old boots, and what is also customary, had quit. Frank didn't want
to hold it back from Nancy, but what can a chap do, against forty?
Also, last night, at a big "so sorry, old chap" party, Frank had found
how loyal a bunch of old pals can turn out; and this "grand launching
into matrimonial doubt" had put him in a happy mood for that all
important oration of two words:--"I do."

So now I'll hurry around to church to find out how Nancy's Organization
girls put in a long day of hard labor; not only at floor work, but up
on stools and chairs. My! My! Just _look_ and gasp!! A long chain of
lilacs runs from door to altar in two rows. And _look_ at that big arch
of wistaria and narcissus half way along! Artificial palms stand in
curving ranks from organ to walls; and, with all lights softly glowing
through pink silk hoods; and with gilt cords outlining an altar-dais
of moss and sprays of asparagus, it is a sight to bring a thrill to
anybody, young or old.

And, now--_aha!!_ With organist and Pastor waiting, a murmur and
hand-clapping from that big front door told all who had luckily got in
that Nancy was coming! It took thirty cars to bring that bridal party
to church; for not a boy or girl of our old Organization would miss
this occasion for a farm, with a pig on it with four kinks in its tail.
Now, naturally, any girl would long to walk up that Holy path with
Nancy, but too many would spoil things; so, by drawing lots, Nancy had
for company, Sarah Young, Lucy Donaldson, Priscilla Standish, Virginia
Adams, Doris Johnson and Cora Grant; with Kathlyn as Maid of Honor, as
charming an array of youthful glory as you could find in all Branton
Hills.

Until this important arrival, Branton Hills' famous organist, just
plain John Smith, was playing softly,--"Just a Song at Twilight,"
watching for a signal from Mayor Gadsby; and soon swung into that
famous march which brought forth a grand thrill, as tiny, blushing,
palpitating Nancy took "Dad's" arm, gazing with shining orbs at that
distant--oh, _so_ distant--altar.

Now I want to know why anybody should want to cry on such a grand
occasion. What is sad about it? But many a lash was moist as that tiny
vision of glamorous purity slowly trod that fragrant pathway. Possibly
girls can't avoid it; anyway, our Branton Hills girls didn't try to do
so.

Gadsby, as has many a good old Dad, fought back any such showing;
but I won't say that his thoughts didn't nag him; for, giving away
your baby girl to any young, though first-class chap, is not actually
_fun_. But that long, long trail finally brought him to that mossy
dais, at which Frank, coming in through a handy door, stood waiting.
Nancy was as calm as a wax doll; but Frank stood shaking with a most
annoying cough (of imaginary origin!) as Pastor Brown stood, book in
hand. Now I won't go through with all that was said; nor say anything
about Nancy's tiny, warm, soft hand as it was put in Frank's big clumsy
fist by Pastor Brown. Nor about that first Holy kiss; nor that long,
mighty roar of organ music, as our happy, blushing pair trod that long
pathway, doorwards. You know all about it, anyway, as most such rituals
follow a standard custom. Nor shall I go into that happy hour at His
Honor's mansion, during which that fancy loaf of frosting, raisins and
citron was cut; (and which many a girl put in a pillow that night!);
nor of that big bridal bunch of blossoms, which was thrown from a
stairway into a happy group of hopping, jumping, laughing girls. (But
I will say,--shhhh! that Kathlyn caught it!); nor anything of Nancy
and Frank's thrilling trip to Branton Hills' big railway station, in
that gift car which Nancy thought was a king's chariot; nor of a grand,
low bow by old Pat Ryan of that station's trunk room. It was just that
customary "_All aboard!!_" a crowd's "Hooray!!" and "Good Luck!!", with
Branton Hills' Municipal Band a-blaring, and a mighty mob shouting and
waving.




XII


Oh, hum! I'll turn from this happy affair now and try to find out what
was going on in this thriving, hustling city. Now you probably think
of a city as a gigantic thing; for, if you go up onto a high hill,
and look around across that vast array of buildings, parks, roads and
distant suburbs, you not only think that it is a gigantic thing, you
_know_ it is. But, _is_ it?

Just stop and think a bit. All such things as bulk, or width, you know
by comparison only; comparison with familiar things. So, just for
fun, go up in an imaginary balloon, about half way to that old Moon,
which has hung aloft from your birth--(and possibly a day or two in
addition)--and look down upon your "gigantic" city. How will it look?
It is a small patch of various colors; but you know that, within that
tiny patch, many thousands of your kind hurry back and forth; railway
trains crawl out to far-away districts; and, if you can pick out a
grain of dust that stands out dimly in a glow of sunlight, you may know
that it is your mansion, your cabin or your hut, according to your
financial status. Now, if that hardly shows up, how about _you_? What
kind of a dot would _you_ form in comparison? You must admit that
your past thoughts as to your own pomposity will shrink just a bit!
All this shows us that could this big World think, it wouldn't know
that such a thing as Man was on it. And Man thinks that his part in all
this unthinkably vast Cosmos is important!! Why, you poor shrimp! if
this old World wants to twitch just a bit and knock down a city or two,
or split up a group of mountains, Man, with all his brain capacity,
can only dash wildly about, dodging falling bricks. No. You wouldn't
show up from that balloon as plainly as an ant, in crawling around our
Capitol building at Washington.

But why all this talk about our own inconspicuosity? It is simply
brought up to accompany Nancy's thoughts as that train shot across
country; for Nancy, until now, had not known anything approaching such
a trip. So this happy, happy trip, back upon which many a woman looks,
with a romantic thrill, was astounding to such a girl. From Branton
Hills to San Francisco; a boat to Honolulu, Manila, Shanghai, Hong
Kong, Colombo, and finally Cairo. Ah! Cairo!! In thinking of it you
naturally bring up two words--"Pyramids" and "Sphinx", words familiar
from school days. Practically from birth, Nancy, along with millions
of folks, had known that famous illustration of a thing half Lion and
half woman; and a mountainous mass of masonry, built for a king's tomb.
So, standing right in front of both, Nancy and Frank got that wondrous
thrill coming from attaining a long, long wish. From Cairo to Italy,
Spain, London, Paris, and that grand Atlantic sail, landing at Boston,
and hustling by fast train (but _how_ slow it did go!!) to Branton
Hills! So, along about Thanksgiving Day, about half of its population
was again at its big railway station, for Nancy was coming back. (And
Frank, too, if anybody should ask you.)

And with that big Municipal Band a-booming and blaring, and crowd
of our old Organization girls pushing forward, did Branton Hills look
good to Nancy? _And did Nancy look good to Branton Hills?_ _What_
a glorious tan, from days and days on shipboard! And was that old
Atlantic ugly? Ask Frank, poor chap, who, as on that big Pacific, had
found out just what a ship's rail is for! And that stomachs can turn
most amazing flip-flops if an old boat is too frisky!

In just an instant, actual count, Nancy was in Lady Gadsby's arms,
fighting valiantly to hold back a flood of big, happy sobs; and Frank
was busy, grabbing a cloud of hands surging towards him.

Coming back from a long trip is a happy occasion. And it is also mighty
good to put a trunk or a bag down, knowing that it will "stay put" for
a day or two, anyway. That constant packing and unpacking on a long
trip, soon turns into an automatic function; and how Nancy did worry
about what transportation customs in various lands would do to a first
class trunk which has a romantic history, owing to its coming as a
matrimonial gift from a group of loving girls. But now; _ah!!_ Put it
away, and your things around, in familiar disposal.

Long trips do bring lots of fun and information; but a truly long trip
is tiring, both in body and mind.

But Nancy and Frank won't stay with Gadsby long; for, during that trip,
a charming bungalow was built on a lot of Gadsby's, facing City Park;
and Nancy put in many days arranging things in it. Anybody who has had
such joyful work to do, knows how assiduously a young pair would go
about it; for two young robins carrying bits of cotton and string up to
a criss-cross of twigs in a big oak, with constant soft, loving chirps,
"had nothing," according to our popular slang, on Nancy and Frank.

Finally "moving in day" got around, with that customary party, to
which you carry a gift to add to such things as a young husband on
only a small salary can install. And _how_ gifts did pour in!! Rugs,
chairs, small stands, urns, clocks, photos in wall mountings, dainty
scarfs (all handwork by our girls in our Night School), books, lamps,
a "radio" from Station KBH, until, finally, a big truck found an
opportunity in that coming and going throng to back in and unload an
upright piano, all satin ribbon wrappings, with a card:--"From Branton
Hills' Municipal Band."




XIII


I could go on for hours about this starting out of Nancy and Frank, but
many civic affairs await us; for Julius Gadsby who has not got into
this story up to now, had, from his constant poring through all kinds
of books of information, built up a thorough insight into fossils;
and you know that Kathlyn is way up in Biology; which brings in our
awkward "bugs" again. Now bugs will burrow in soil, and always did,
from History's birth; building catacombs which at last vanish through a
piling up of rocks, sand or soil on that spot. Now Julius continually
ran across accounts of important "finds" of such fossils, and with
Kathlyn's aid was soon inaugurating popular clamor for a big Hall of
Natural History.

This, Julius and Kathlyn thought, would turn out as popular, in a way,
as living animals out at our Zoo. But an appropriation for a Hall
of Natural History is a hard thing to jam through a City Council;
for though its occupants call for no food, you can't maintain such
a building without human custody; "which," said Old Bill Simpkins,
"is but a tricky way of saying CASH!!" But our Council was by now so
familiar with calls from that famous "Organization", and, owing to
its inborn faith in that grand body of hustling Youth, such a building
was built; Julius and Kathlyn arranging all displays of fossil birds,
plants, "bugs," footprints, raindrop marks, worms, skulls, parts of
jaws, and so on. And what a crowd was on hand for that first public
day! Julius and Kathlyn took visitors through various rooms, giving
much data upon what was shown; and many a Branton Hills inhabitant
found out a lot of facts about our vast past; about organisms living
so far back in oblivion as to balk Man's brain to grasp. Kathlyn stood
amongst groups of botanical fossilizations, with Gadsby not far away,
as this studious young woman told school pupils how our common plants
of today through various transitions in form, show a kinship with
what now lay, in miraculously good condition, in this big Hall; and
Julius told staring groups how this or that fossil did actually link
such animals as our cow or walrus of today with original forms totally
apart, both in looks and habits. And it was comforting to Gadsby to
find pupils asking how long ago this was, and noting that amazing look
as Julius had to say that nobody knows.

Such a building is an addition to any city; for this big World is so
old that human calculation cannot fathom it; and it will, in all
probability, go on always. So it is improving a child's mind to visit
such displays; for it will start a train of thoughts along a path not
commonly sought if such institutions do not stand as attractions. Now,
in any community a crank will bob up, who will, with loud acclaim and
high-sounding words, avow that it "is a scandalous drain on public
funds to put up such a building just to show a lot of rocks, animals'
ribs and birds' skulls." But such loud bombasts only show up an
"orator's" brain capacity (or lack of it), and actually bring studious
folks to ask for just such data upon things which his ridiculing had
run down. It is an old, old story, that if you want a city's population
to go in strongly for anything, and you start a loud, bawling campaign
against it, that public will turn to it for information as to its
worth. So, just such a loud, bawling moron had to drift into our Hall
on its inauguration day, and soon ran smack up against Kathlyn! That
worthy girl, allowing him to "blow off" a bit, finally said:--

"I know you. You run a stock farm. All right. You want to know all you
can about matching and crossing your stock, don't you? I thought so.
But God did all that, long, oh, _so_ long ago; gradually producing such
animals as you own today; and all you can do is to follow along, in
your puny way, and try to avoid a poor quality of stock mixing with
yours. This building contains thousands of God's first works. It won't
do you a bit of harm to look through our rooms. Nothing will jump out
at you!"

At that that barking critic shut up! And Gadsby slid outdoors,
chuckling:--

"That's _my_ girl talking!! That's my Kathlyn!!"

It is curious why anybody should pooh-pooh a study of fossils or
various forms of rocks or lava. Such things grant us our only vision
into Natural History's big book; and it isn't a book in first-class
condition. Far from it! Just a tiny scrap; a slip; or, possibly a
big chunk is found, with nothing notifying us as to how it _got_ to
that particular point, nor how long ago. Man can only look at it,
lift it, rap it, cut into it, and squint at it through a magnifying
glass. And,--_think_ about it. That's all; until a formal study brings
accompanying thoughts from many minds; and, by such tactics, judging
that in all probability such and such a rock or fossil footprint is
about so old. Natural History holds you in its grasp through just this
impossibility of finding actual facts; for it is thus causing you to
_think_. Now, thinking is not only a voluntary function; it is an
_acquisition_; an _art_. Plants do not think. Animals probably do, but
in a primary way, such as an aid in knowing poisonous foods, and how to
bring up an offspring with similar ability. But Man can, and _should_
think, and think hard and constantly. It is ridiculous to rush blindly
into an action without looking forward to lay out a plan. Such an
unthinking custom is almost a panic, and panic is but a mild form of
insanity.

So Kathlyn and Julius did a grand, good thing in having this Hall as an
addition to Branton Hills' institutions.

Now, in any city or town, or almost any small community, you will find
a building, or possibly only a room, about which said city or town has
nothing to say. It is that most important institution in which you put
a stamp on your mail and drop it into a slot, knowing that it will find
its way across city or country to that man or woman who is waiting for
it.

But how many young folks know _how_ this mail is put out so quickly,
and with such guaranty against loss? Not many, I think, if you ask.
So Gadsby, holding up Youth as a Nation's most important function in
its coming history, thought that any act which would instruct a child
in any way, was worthy. So, on a Saturday morning His Honor took a
group of Grammar School pupils to a balcony in back of that all-hiding
partition, and a postal official, showing all mail handling acts
individually, said:--

"In this country, two things stand first in rank: your flag and your
mail. You all know what honor you pay to your flag, but you should
know, also, that your mail,--just that ordinary postal card--is also
important. But a postal card, or any form of mail, is _not_ important,
in that way, until you drop it through a slot in this building, and
with a stamp on it, or into a mail box outdoors. Up to that instant
it is but a common card, which anybody can pick up and carry off
without committing a criminal act. But as soon as it is in back of
this partition, or in a mail box, a magical transformation occurs; and
anybody who _now_ should willfully purloin it, or obstruct its trip
in any way, will find prison doors awaiting him. What a frail thing
ordinary mail is! A baby could rip it apart, but no adult is so foolish
as to do it. That small stamp which you stick on it, is, you might say,
a postal official, going right along with it, having it always in his
sight."

A giggling girl was curious to know if that was why a man's photo is on
it.

"Possibly," said our official, laughing. "But wait a bit. Look
downstairs. As your mail falls in through that slot, or is brought in
by a mailman it is put through an ink-daubing apparatus--that's it,
right down in front of you--which totally ruins its stamp. How about
your man's photo, now?"

A good laugh rang around, and our official said:--

"Now a man sorts it according to its inscription, puts it into a canvas
bag and aboard a train, or possibly an aircraft. But that bag has
mail going to points a long way apart, so a man in a mail car sorts
it out, so that Chicago won't find mail in its bag which should go to
California."

At this point our giggling girl said:--

"Ooooo! I had a Christmas card for Missouri go way down to Mississippi!"

"How did you mark it?"

"I put M-i-s-s for Missouri."

"Try M-o, and I wish you luck."

As that laugh ran round, our official said:--

"Now you know that you can buy a long, narrow stamp which will hurry
your mail along. So, as all mail in this building is put up in many a
small bunch, all with such stamps attract a mailman, who will so wrap a
bunch that that kind of a stamp will show up plainly. Upon its arrival
at a distant point, a boy will grab it, and hurry it to its final
goal. But that stamp will not hurry it as long as it is on that train."

Our giggling girl, swinging in again, said:--

"What? With that stamp right on top?"

"How can it?" said our official. "A train can only go just so fast,
stamp or no stamp."

"Oh."

Our boys and girls got a big thrill from this visit in back of that
partition, and told Gadsby so. On coming out of that building our party
saw a big patrolman putting a small boy into a patrol wagon. That
poor kid was but a bunch of rags, dirty, and in a fighting mood. Our
boys got a big laugh out of it. Our girls, though, did _not_. Young
Marian Hopkins, who had that fairy wand, you know, at our airport
inauguration, said:--

"Oh, that poor child! Will that cop put him in jail, Mayor Gadsby?" At
which His Honor instantly thought of a plan long in his mind. Branton
Hills had a court room, a child's court, in fact, at which a kindly man
looks out for just such young waifs--trying to find out why such tots
commit unlawful acts. So Gadsby said:--

"I don't know, Marian, but I want you young folks to go on a visit,
tonight, to our night court, to find out about just such wild boys.
How many want to go?"

To his satisfaction, all did; and so, that night that court room had
rows of young folks, all agog with curiosity which a first visit to a
court stirs up in a child. Just by luck, our young vagrant in rags was
brought in first, shaking with childish doubt as to what was going to
occur. But that kindly man sitting back of that big mahogany railing
had no thought of scaring a child, and said calmly:--

"Now, boy, what did you do that you ought not to do; and why did you do
it?"

As our boys sat nudging and winking, but with our girls growing sad
from sympathy, our young culprit said:--

"Aw! I grabs a bun, and dis big cop grabs my collar!"

"But why did you grab that bun? It wasn't yours, you know."

"_Gosh_, man!! I was _hungry!!_"

"Hungry? Don't your folks look out for you?"

"Naw; I do my own looking. And that's what I _was_ doing, too!"

"What had you for food all day?"

"Just that bun. And _say!!_ I only got _half_ of it! That big cop was
so rough!"

"Did that cop, as you call him, hurt you?"

"_Hurt!!_ I should say _not!!_ I put up a good stiff scrap! I paid him
back, blow for blow! No big gas-bag of a cop is going to wallop _this_
kid and not pay for it!"

"But, boy, don't your folks bring you up to know that it is wrong to
rob anybody?"

"Naw! My Dad robs folks, and just got six months for it. So why
shouldn't I? It's all right to do what your Dad will do, isn't it?"

"Not always, boy," and our girls in row two and our boys in row four
sat sad and glum at this portrayal of youthful sin. Finally that big
kindly man, thoughtfully rubbing his chin, said:--

"Whom did your Dad rob?"

"I dunno. It was a Ford car. Nobody wasn't in it, so why not grab it?
That's what Dad said. You can pick up a bit of cash for a car, you
know, boss. And say, if a car brung only six months, how long will I
squat in jail for swiping this half bun? Aw! Go slow, boss! I ain't no
bad kid! Only just a hungry mutt. Gosh!! _How_ I wish I had a glass of
milk!"

From row two a young, vigorous girlish form shot out, dashing for a
doorway; and as that big kindly man was still rubbing his chin, Marian
burst in again, rushing, sobbingly, to that sad bunch of rags, holding
out a pint of milk and two hot biscuits. A quick snatch by two horribly
dirty young hands, a limp flop on a mat at that big mahogany railing,
and a truly hungry child was oblivious to all around him. And I'll say
that our boys, in row four, had lumpy throats. But finally that big
kindly man said:--

"Though taking things unlawfully is wrong, conditions can occur in
which so young a culprit is not at fault. This young chap has had no
bringing up, but has run wild. A child will not know right from wrong
if not taught; and, as it is a primary animal instinct to obtain food
in any way, I will simply put this boy in a school which Branton Hills
maintains for just such youths."

At this both row two and row four burst out in such a storm of
hand-clapping that Gadsby found that this visit had shown his young
folks, from actual contact with a child without training, how important
child-raising is; and how proud a city is of such as act according to
law.




XIV


In almost any big town, around Autumn, you will annually run across
that famous agricultural show known as a County Fair; and, as Branton
Hills had a big park, which you know all about, right in front of
Nancy's and Frank's small bungalow, it was a most natural spot for
holding it. And so, as this happy pair's third Autumn got around,
stirring activity in that big park also got a-going; for railings for
stockyards don't grow all built; yards and yards of brown canvas don't
just blow into a park; nor do "hot dog" and popcorn stands jump up from
nothing. And Nancy, rocking on that bungalow porch, could watch all
this work going on. And rocking was about all that Nancy could, or, I
should say, _should_ do, just now.

What a sight it was! Trucks; small cars; wagons; a gang with a tractor
plowing up hard spots; a gang picking up rocks, grading humpy spots,
and laying out ground plans. Masons building walls, and all kinds
of goods arriving, by tons. But out of all that confusion and ado a
canvas town will grow, strung from top to bottom with gaily flapping
flags and hanging bunting, and that customary "mid-way" with its long
rows of gaudy billboards, in front of which circus ballyhoo artists
will continuously bawl and shout out claims about sword-swallowing,
tattooing, hula-hula dancing, boa constrictor charming, or a Punch and
Judy show.

At a County Fair two things stand out as most important: farm stock
and that oval track around which swiftly trotting colts will thrill
thousands; and, I'll say, shrink a bank account or two! But, of all
sights, I don't know of any with such drawing ability for kids as just
such a carnival lot. So, daily, as soon as school was out, throngs
of happy, shouting, hopping, jumping boys and girls would dash for
that big park; looking, pointing, and climbing up on auto tops, into
lofty oaks, onto tall rocks, or a pal's back; for if anything is
difficult for a boy to obtain a sight of, nothing in climbing that an
orang-outang can do, will balk him!

So Nancy sat calmly rocking, rocking, rocking, and,--but, pardon! I'll
go on with this story. All I know is that Frank, arriving from work
at Radio Station KBH, wouldn't so much as look at that big carnival
lot, but would rush in, in a most loving, solicitous way which always
brought a kiss and a blush from Nancy. Now if I don't quit talking
about this young pair you won't know anything about that big show
going up in front of that happy bungalow. Almost daily Lady Gadsby
would drop in on Nancy, bringing all sorts of dainty foods; and His
Honor, with Kathlyn, Julius and Bill, paid customary visits.

"But that fair!" you say. "How about that fair?"

Ah! It _was_ a fair, I'll say! What mobs on that first day! And what a
din!! Bands playing, ballyhoos shouting, popcorn a-popping, "hot dogs"
a-sizzling, ducks squawking, cows lowing, pigs grunting, an occasional
baby squalling; and 'midst it all, a choking cloud of dust, a hot
Autumn wind, panting, fanning matrons, cussing husbands; all working
toward that big oval track at which all had a flimsy possibility of
winning a million or two (or a dollar or two!). Oh, you County Fairs!
You bloom in your canvas glory, annually. You draw vast crowds; you
show high quality farm stock, gigantic pumpkins, thousands of poultry,
including our "Thanksgiving National Bird". You fill coops with fancy
squabs, fat rabbits, and day-old chicks. You show many forms of
incubators, churns, farming apparatus, pumps, plows, lighting plants
for small farms, windmills, "bug" poisons, and poultry foods. And you
always add a big balloon, which you anchor, so that kids may soar
aloft until a windlass pulls it down. You fill us with food that
would kill a wild goat, but you still last! And may you always do so;
for, within your flapping, bulging canvas walls, city man rubs against
town man, rich and poor girls bump, snobs attain no right of way, and
a proud, happy boy or girl shows a "First Class" satin ribbon which a
lovingly brought-up calf or poultry brood has won.

Only a satin ribbon, but, displaying it to a group of admiring young
pals brings to a child that natural thrill from accomplishing anything
worthy of public acclaim. Such thrills will not crowd in as Maturity
supplants Youth; and so I say, "a trio of our customary huzzas" for any
child who can carry away a satin ribbon from a County Fair.

But what about our good Mayor during all this circus hullabaloo? Did
important thoughts for still improving Branton Hills pass through his
busy mind? Not just now; but fond, anxious thoughts did; for his mind
was constantly on Nancy; tiny, darling Nancy, his baby girl. For,
during that noisy carnival, folks saw (or _thought_ so, you know), a
big bird with long shanks and a monstrous bill, circling round and
round that small bungalow's roof, plainly looking for a spot to land
on. Lady Gadsby and old Doctor Wilkins saw it, too, and told Nancy that
that big hospital which our old Organization had built, was holding
a room for instant occupancy; and, as that big bird daily swung down,
down, down, almost grazing that small roof, Frank, poor chap, as shaky
as at his church ritual, thirty months ago, staid away from Radio
Station KBH, and stuck to that small bungalow as a fly sticks around a
sugar bowl.

Finally, on a crisp Autumn night, that soaring bird shot straight down
with such an assuring swoop, that old Doc Wilkins, indoors with Nancy,
saw it and said, quickly:--

"On your way, Nancy girl!!" and that part of Branton Hills saw his
car racing hospitalwards, with Lady Gadsby fondly patting Nancy's
tiny, cold hands, and saying just such loving things as a woman would,
naturally, to a young girl on such a trip. But Gadsby and Frank? Ah!
Poor, half-crazy things! No car would do at all! _No, sir!!_ A car
was far too slow! And so, across lots, down into many a man's yard,
and jumping high walls, shot two shadowy forms, arriving at that big
hospital, badly blown, just as Lady Gadsby and old Doc Wilkins took
Nancy's arms, and got slowly to that big door with its waiting rolling
chair.

Now this stork's visit is nothing out of ordinary in World affairs.
Millions and billions of visits has it, and its kind, flown--to king's
mansion or a black Zulu woman's hut. But _this_ flight was poor
Frank's initiation to that awful hour of blank panic, during which a
young husband is boiling hot or icy cold in turn. God!! How still a
hospital corridor is!! How doctors and assistants do float past without
as much sound as falling snow! Oh! _How_ long Frank and His Honor
sat, stood, or trod up and down, watching that room door!! What was
going on? Was Nancy all right? Oh!! Why this prolonging of agonizing
inactivity? Can't anybody say anything? _Isn't anybody around, at all?_
But hospital doctors and nursing staffs, though pitying a young chap,
must pass him up for that tiny lady, who now was but a tool in God's
hands; in God's magic laboratory. And so---- _Ah!!_ Doctor Wilkins is
coming--_and smiling!!_

"A baby girl--and with a ripping good pair of lungs!" but has to jump
quick to catch Frank, who has sunk in a swoon. And Mayor Gadsby's
collar is as limp as a dish-rag!

Ah! Man, man, man! and woman, woman, woman! Just you two! God's only
parts in His mighty plan for living actuality. Not only with Man and
animals, but also down,--way, _way_ down amongst plants. Just two
parts. Only two!! And Baby, you tiny bunch of wriggling, gurgling
humanity, by that slowly ticking clock is _your_ turn in this mighty
World, unavoidably arriving. Mama, Papa, and all of us will go on, for
a bit, growing old and gray, but you, now so young and frail, will
stand sturdily, and willingly, in our vacancy; and carry on God's will!




XV


As this is a history of a city I must not stay around any part too
long. So, as it was almost "a small morning hour," Nina Adams, a widow,
was sitting up; for Virginia, a High School girl, was still out; and,
around two-thirty, was brought back in a fast car; two youths actually
_dumping_ an unconscious form on Nina's front porch, and dashing
madly away. But Nina Adams saw it; and, calling for aid in carrying
Virginia indoors, put in a frantic call for old Doc Wilkins, an old,
long-ago school pal, who found Nina frantic from not knowing Virginia's
condition, nor why pair of youths shot madly away without calling
anybody. But it only took Doctor Wilkins an instant to find out what
was wrong; and Nina, noting his tight lips and growing scowl was in an
agony of doubt.

"What _is_ it, Tom? _Quick!!_ I'm almost crazy!!"

Dr. Wilkins, standing by Virginia's couch, said, slowly:--

"It's nothing to worry about, Nina. Virginia will pull through all
right, by morning."

But that didn't satisfy Nina Adams, _not for an instant_, and Dr.
Wilkins, knowing that ironclad spirit of school days which would stand
for no obstructions in its path, saw that a "blow-up" was coming; but,
through a kindly thought for this woman's comfort, did not say what his
diagnosis was, until Nina, now actually livid with worry, said:--

"Tom Wilkins! _Doctor_ Wilkins, if you wish,--I claim a natural right
to know why my child is unconscious! And you, a physician, cannot, by
law, withhold such information!!"

But Wilkins, trying to find a way out of a most unhappy condition of
affairs, said:--

"Now, Nina, you know I wouldn't hold anything from you if Virginia was
critically ill, but that is not so. If you'll only wait until morning
you'll find that I am right."

But this only built obstruction upon obstruction to Nina's strong will,
until Dr. Wilkins, noticing coming total prostration, had to say:--

"Nina, Virginia is _drunk_; _horribly_ drunk."

"_Drunk!!_" Widow Adams had to grab wildly at a chair, sinking into it;
at first as limp as a rag, but instantly springing up, blood surging to
a throbbing brow. "_Drunk!_ _Drunk!!_ _My_ baby drunk!! Tom, I thank
you for trying to ward off this shock; but I'll say right now, _with my
hand on high_, that I am going to start a rumpus about this atrocity
that will rock Branton Hills to its foundations! Who _got_ this young
school-girl drunk? I know that Virginia wouldn't drink that stuff
willingly. How _could_ it occur? I pay through taxation for a patrolman
in this district; in fact in _all_ districts of this city. What is
a patrolman for, if not to watch for just such abominations as this,
pray?"

Dr. Wilkins didn't say, though probably thinking of a rumor that had
run around town for a month or two. At this point Virginia, partly
conscious, was murmuring:--

"Oh, Norman! _Don't!!_ I _can't_ drink it! Oh! I'm _so_ sick!!"

This brought forth all of Nina Adams' fury instantly.

"_Aha! Aha! Norman!_ So _that's_ it! That's Norman Antor, that
low-down, good-for-nothing night-owl! Son of our big Councilman Antor.
So!! It's 'Norman! I can't drink it'! Tom Wilkins, this thing is going
to _court!!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

About noon of that day, our good doctor, walking sadly along, ran
across Mayor Gadsby, in front of City Hall; and did His Honor "_burn_"
at such an abomination?

"_What?_ High School boys _forcing_ young girls to drink? And right in
our glorious Branton Hills? Oh, but, Doc! This can't pass without a
trial!"

"That's all right, John; but a thorn sticks out, right in plain sight."

"Thorn? Thorn? What kind of a thorn?" and our Mayor was flushing hard,
as no kind of wild thoughts would point to any kind of thorns.

"That thorn," said Wilkins, "is young Norman Antor; son of----"

"_Not of Councilman Antor?_"

"I am sorry to say that it is so," and Wilkins told of Virginia's
half-conscious murmurings. "And Nina wants to know why, with a
patrolman in all parts of town, it isn't known that all this drinking
is going on. I didn't say what I thought, but you know that a patrolman
don't go into dancing pavilions and night clubs until conditions
sanction it."

"Who is supplying this liquor?"

"Councilman Antor; but without knowing it."

All His Honor could say was to gasp:--

"How do you know that, Doc?" and Wilkins told of four calls for him in
four days, to young girls, similarly drunk.

"And my _first_ call was to young Mary--Antor's tiny Grammar School
kid, who was as drunk as Virginia; but, on coming out of it, told of
robbing Antor's pantry, in which liquor was always on hand for his
political pals, you know; that poor kid taking it to various affairs
and giving it to boys; and winning 'popularity' that way."

"So," said Gadsby, "Councilman Antor's boy and girl, brought up in
a family with liquor always handy, now, with ignorant, childish
braggadocio, bring Councilman Antor into this mix-up! I'm sorry for
Antor; but his pantry is in for an official visit."

It wasn't so long from this day that Court got around to this rumpus.
To say that that big room was _full_, would put it mildly. Although,
according to an old saying, "a cat is only as big as its skin," that
room's walls almost burst, as groups of church organizations and law
abiding inhabitants almost fought for admission; until standing room
was nothing but a suffocating jam. As Gadsby and Doc Wilkins sat
watching that sight, Gadsby said:--

"It's an outpouring of rightful wrath by a proud city's population;
who, having put out good, hard work in bringing it to its high
standing as a community, today, will not stand for anything that will
put a blot on its municipal flag, which is, right now, proudly flying
on City Hall."

As Wilkins was about to say so, a rising murmur was rolling in from out
back, for Norman Antor was coming in, in custody of a big patrolman,
and with four youths, all looking, not only anxious, but plainly
showing humiliation at such an abomination against trusting young
girlhood. Scowls and angry rumblings told that high official, way up in
back of that mahogany railing, that but a spark would start a riot. So,
in a calm, almost uncanny way, this first trial of its kind in Branton
Hills got along to a court official calling, loudly:--

"Virginia Adams!!"

If you think that you know what a totally still room is, by no kink
of your imagination could you possibly know such an awful, frightful
_hush_ as struck that crowd dumb, as Virginia, a tall, dark, willowy,
stylish girl quickly took that chair, from which Truth, in all its
purity, is customarily brought out. But Virginia was not a bit shaky
nor anxious, nor doubtful of an ability to go through with this ugly
task.

Gadsby and Doc Wilkins sat watching Nina; Gadsby with profound
sympathy, but Wilkins with an old school-pal's intuition, watching
for a blow-up. But Nina didn't blow up, that is, not visibly; but that
famous rigid will was boiling, full tilt; boiling up to a point for
landing, "tooth and claw" on our pompous Councilman's son, if things
didn't turn out satisfactorily.

Virginia didn't occupy that stand long; it was only a half-sobbing
account of a night at a dancing pavilion; and with a sob or two from a
woman or girl in that vast crowd. All Virginia said was:--

"Norman Antor said I was a cry-baby if I wouldn't drink with him.
But I said, 'All right; I _am_ a cry-baby! And I always _will_ turn
'cry-baby' if anybody insists that I drink that stuff.'" (Just a short
lull, a valiant fight for control, and)--"But I _had_ to drink!! Norman
was tipping my chair back and John Allison was forcing that glass into
my mouth! I got so sick I couldn't stand up, and didn't know a thing
until I found I was on a couch in my own parlor."

A court official said, kindly:--

"That will do, Miss Adams."

During this, Nina was glaring at Norman; but Virginia's bringing
Allison into it, also, was too much. But Wilkins, watching narrowly,
said, snappingly:--

"_Nina!_ This is a _court room_."

Now this trial was too long to go into, word for word; so I'll say
that not only Norman Antor and Allison, but also our big, pompous
Councilman Antor, according to our popular slang, "got in bad"; and
Branton Hills' dancing and night spots got word to prohibit liquor
or shut up shop. Young Mary Antor was shown that liquor, in dancing
pavilions or in a family pantry was not good for young girls; and soon
this most disgusting affair was a part of Branton Hills' history. And
what vast variations a city's history contains! What valorous acts by
far-thinking officials! What dark daubs of filth by avaricious crooks!
What an array of past Mayors; what financial ups and downs; what growth
in population. But, as I am this particular city's historian, _with
strict orthography controlling it_, this history will not rank, in
volubility, with any by an author who can sow, broadcast, all handy,
common words which _continuously_ try to jump into it!




XVI


Branton Hills, now an up-to-today city, coming to that point of
motorizing all city apparatus, had just a last, solitary company
of that class which an inhabitant frantically calls to a burning
building--Company Four, in our big shopping district; all apparatus of
which was still animal drawn; four big, husky chaps: two blacks and
two roans. Any thought of backing in any sort of motor apparatus onto
this floor, upon which this loyal four had, during many months, stood,
champing at bits, pawing and whinnying to start out that big door, in
daylight or night-gloom, calm or storm,--was mighty tough for old Dowd
and Clancy. A man living day and night with such glorious, vivacious
animals, grows to look upon such as almost human. Bright, brainy,
sparkling colts can win a strong hold on a man, you know.

And now!! What form of disposal was awaiting "Big Four", as Clancy and
Dowd took a fond joy in dubbing this pair of blacks and two roans?
Clancy and Dowd didn't know anything but that a mass of cogs, piping,
brass railings, an intricacy of knobs, buttons, spark-plugs, forward
clutch and so forth was coming tomorrow.

"_Aw!!_" said Dowd, moaningly, "you know, Clancy, that good old light
shifting about and that light 'stomping' in that row of stalls, at
night; you know, old man, that happy crunching of corn; that occasional
cough; that tail-swatting at a fly or crazy zigzagging moth; that grand
animal odor from that back part of this floor."

"I do," said Clancy. "And _now_ what? A loud whizz of a motor! A
suffocating blast of gas! and a dom thing a-standin' on this floor, wid
no brain; wid nothin' lovin' about it. Wid no soul."

"Um-m-m," said Dowd, "I dunno about an animal havin' a soul, but it's
got a thing not so dom far _from_ it."

As Clancy sat worrying about various forms of disposal for Big Four, an
official phoning from City Hall, said just an ordinary, common word,
which had Clancy hopping up and down, _furiously mad_.

"What's all this? What's all this?" Dowd sang out, coming from a stall,
in which a good rubbing down of a shiny coat, and continuous loving
pats had brought snuggling and nosing.

"_Auction!!_" said Clancy, wildly, and sitting down with a thud.

"Auction? Auction for Big Four? _What?_ Put up on a block as you would
a Jap urn or a phony diamond?"

"Uh-huh; that's what City Hall says."

An awful calm slunk insidiously onto that big smooth floor, as Dowd and
Clancy, chins on hands, sat,--just thinking! Finally Clancy burst out
with:--

"Aw! If an alarm would _only_ ring in, right now, to stop my brain from
cracking! _Auction! Bah!!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

A big crowd stood in City Park, including His Honor, many a Councilman,
and, naturally, Old Bill Simpkins, who was always bound to know what
was going on. A loud, fast-talking man, on a high stand, was shouting:--

"All right, you guys! How much? How much for this big black? A mountain
of muscular ability! Young, kind, willing, smart! How much? How much?"

Bids abominably low at first, but slowly crawling up; crawling slowly,
as a boa constrictor crawls up on its victim. But, _without fail_, as
a bid was sung out from that surging, gawking, chin-lifting mob, a
woman, way in back, would surpass it! And that woman hung on, as no boa
constrictor could! Gadsby, way down in front, couldn't fathom it, at
all. Why should a woman want Big Four? A solitary animal, possibly, but
_four!_ So His Honor, turning and making his way toward that back row,
ran smack into Nancy.

"Daddy! Lady Standish is outbidding all this crowd!"

"Oho! So _that's_ it!"

So Gadsby, pushing his way again through that jam, and coming to that
most worthy woman, said:--

"By golly, Sally! It's plain that you want Big Four."

"John Gadsby, you ought to _know_ that I do. Why! A man might buy that
big pair of roans to hitch up to a plow! Or hook a big black onto an
ash cart!"

"I know that, Sally, but that small back yard of yours is----"

"_John!!_ Do your Municipal occupations knock all past days' doings out
of your skull? You _know_ that I own a grand, big patch of land out
in our suburbs, half as big as Branton Hills. So this Big Four will
just run around, jump, roll, kick, and loaf until doomsday, if I can
_wallop_ this mob out of bidding."

As Lady Standish was long known as standing first in valuation on
Branton Hills' tax list, nobody in that crowd was so foolish as to
hang on, in a war of bidding, against _that_ bankroll. So Gadsby shook
hands, put an arm about Nancy, walking happily away, as a roar of
plaudits shot out from that crowd, for that loud, fast-talking man was
announcing:--

"_Sold! All four to Lady Standish!!_"

As Gadsby and Nancy ran across Old Bill Simpkins, Gadsby said:--

"Bill, _you_ know that grand old day. Look! A building is burning! A
patrolman has put in an alarm! And _now_ look! Coming down Broadway!
Two big blacks, and following on, two big roans! What grand, mighty
animals! Nostrils dilating; big hoofs pounding; gigantic flanks
bulging; mighty lungs snorting; monstrous backs straining; thick, full
tails standing straight out. Coming, sir! Coming, sir!! Just as fast as
brain and brawn can! And that gong-clanging, air-splitting, whistling,
shining, sizzling, smoking four tons of apparatus roars past, grinding
and banging on Broadway's paving! _You_ saw all that, Bill."

"Uh-huh," said Simpkins, "but a motor don't hurt our paving so much."

As Nancy took His Honor's arm again, Gadsby said:--

"Poor, cranky old Bill! Always running things down."

But how about Clancy and Dowd? On moving out from that big park, that
happy pair, if Knighthood was in bloom today, would bow low, and kiss
fair Lady Standish's hand.




XVII


Oh, hum. Now that Nancy's baby is gurgling or squalling, according to
a full tummy, or tooth conditions; and Nancy is looking, as Gadsby
says, "as good as a million dollars," I find that that busy young
son-of-a-gun, Dan Cupid, is still snooping around Branton Hills. And
_now_ who do you think is hit? Try to think of a lot of girls in
Gadsby's old Organization of Youth. No, it's not Sarah Young, nor Lucy
Donaldson, nor Virginia Adams. It was brought to your historian in this
way:--

Lady Gadsby and His Honor sat around his parlor lamp, His Honor
noticing that Lady G. was smiling, finally saying:--

"John."

"Uh-huh."

"Kathlyn and John Smith,----"

"What?"

"I said that Kathlyn and John Smith want to----"

"Oho! Aha!! I'll call up Pastor Brown to start right off dolling up his
big church!"

"No, no! Not now! Wait about six months. This is only a troth. Folks
don't jump into matrimony, that way."

"Hm-m-m! I don't know about that," said Gadsby, laughing; and thinking
way back to that captivating lasso!

John Smith was Branton Hills' famous church organist; and, at a small,
dainty lunch, Kathlyn told of this troth. In a day or two about all
Branton Hills' young girlhood had, on rushing in, told Kathlyn what a
grand chap John was; and all that town's young manhood had told John
similar things about Kathlyn. So, as this is a jumpy sort of a story,
anyway, why not skip months of happy ardor, and find how this tying of
an additional knot in our Mayor's family will turn out? You know that
Kathlyn don't think much of pomp or show, and such a big church ritual
as Nancy had is all right if you want it, but Kathlyn had fond thoughts
of just a small, parlor affair, with only a group of old chums; and
_no_ throwing of old boots, and "sharp food-grains," which work
downward, to scratch your back, or stick in your hair as stubbornly as
burrs.

"Such crazy doings," said Kathlyn, "always look foolish. It's odd how
anybody can follow up such antiquarian customs."

As Kathlyn's big night was drawing nigh, Lady Gadsby and Nancy had
constantly thought of a word synonymous with "woman", and that word is
"scrub." Which is saying that Gadsby's mansion was about to submit to
a gigantic scrubbing, painting, dusting, and so forth, so that Kathlyn
should start out on that ship of matrimony from a spic-span wharf. Just
why a woman thinks that a grain of dust in a totally inconspicuous spot
is such a catastrophic abnormality is hard to say; but if you simply
broach a thought that a grain of it _might_ lurk in back of a piano, or
up back of an oil painting, a flood of soap-suds will instantly burst
forth; and any man who can find any of his things for four days is a
clairvoyant, or a magician!

As Gadsby sat watching all this his thoughts took this form:--

"Isn't it surprising what an array of things a woman can drag forth,
burrowing into attics, rooms and nooks! Things long out of mind; an
_old_ thing; a worn-out thing; but it has lain in that room, nook or
bag until just such a riot of soap and scrubbing brush brings it out.
And, as I think of it, a human mind could, and should go through just
such a ransacking, occasionally; for you don't know _half_ of what an
accumulation of rubbish is kicking about, in its dark, musty corridors.
Old fashions in thoughts; bigotry; vanity; all lying stagnant. So why
not drag out and sort all that stuff, discarding all which is of no
valuation? About half of us will find, in our minds, a room, having on
its door a card, saying: "It Was Not So In My Day." Go _at_ that room,
right off. That "My Day" is long past. "Today" is boss, now. If that
"My Day" could crawl up on "Today," what a mix-up in World affairs
would occur! Ox cart against aircraft; oil lamps against arc lights!
Slow, mail information against radio! But, as all this stuff is laid
out, what will you do with it? Nobody wants it. So I say, burn it, and
tomorrow morning, how happy you will find that musty old mind!"

But His Honor's mansion finally got back to normal as clouds of dust
and swats and slaps from dusting cloths had shown Lady Gadsby and
Kathlyn that "that parlor was simply awful" though Gadsby, Julius and
Bill always had thought that "It looks all right," causing Kathlyn to
say:--

"A man thinks all dust stays outdoors."

Though marrying off a girl in church is a big proposition, it can't
discount, in important data, doing a similar act in a parlor; for,
as a parlor is a mighty small room in comparison with a church, you
can't point to an inch of it that won't do its small part on such an
occasion; so a woman will find about a thousand spots in which to
put tacks from which to run strings holding floral chains, sprays,
or small lights. So Gadsby, Bill and Julius, with armfuls of string
and mouthfuls of tacks, not only put in hours at pounding said tacks,
but an occasional vigorous word told that a thumb was substituting!
But what man wouldn't gladly bang his thumb, or bark his shins on a
wobbly stool, to aid so charming a girl as Kathlyn? And, on that most
romantically important of all days!!

Anyway, that day's night finally cast its soft shadows on Branton
Hills. Night, with its twinkling stars, its lightning-bugs, and its
call for girls' most glorious wraps; and youths' "swallowtails", and
tall silk hats,--is Cupid's own; lacking but organ music to turn it
into Utopia.

And was Gadsby's mansion lit up from porch to roof? No. Only that
parlor and a room or two upstairs, for wraps, mascara, a final
hair-quirk, a dab of lip-stick; for Kathlyn, against all forms of
"vain display," said:--

"I'm only going to marry a man; not put on a circus for all Branton
Hills."

"All right, darling," said Gadsby, "you shall marry in a pitch dark
room if you wish; for, as you say, a small, parlor affair is just as
binding as a big church display. It's only your vows that count."

So but a small group stood lovingly in Gadsby's parlor, as Parson Brown
brought into unity Kathlyn and John. Kathlyn was _radiantly_ happy; and
John, our famous organist, was as happy with only charming Sarah Young
at an upright piano, as any organist in a big choir loft.

But to Lady Gadsby and His Honor, this was, in a way, a sad affair;
for that big mansion now had lost two of its inhabitants; and, as many
old folks know, a vast gap, or chasm thus forms, backward across which
flit happy visions of laughing, romping, happy girlhood; happy hours
around a sitting room lamp; and loving trips in night's small hours to
a room or two, just to know that a small girl was all right, or that
a big girl was not in a draft. But, though marrying off a girl _will_
bring such a vacancy, that happy start out into a world throbbing with
vitality and joy, can allay a bit of that void in a big mansion, or a
small cabin. A birth, a tooth, a growth, a mating; and, again a birth,
a tooth, and so on. Such is that mighty Law, which was laid down on
that first of all days; and which will control Man, animal, and plant
until that last of all nights.

So it was first Nancy, and now Kathlyn; and Branton Hills' gossips
thought of Bill and Julius, with whom many a young, romantic maid would
gladly sit in a wistaria-drooping arbor on a warm, moon-lit night;
flighty maids with Bill, adoring his high class social gossip; studious
maids with Julius, finding much to think about in his practical talks
on physics, zoology, and natural history. But Bill and Julius had shown
no liability of biting at any alluring bait on any matrimonial hook;
and Gadsby, winking knowingly, would say:--

"Bill is too frivolous, just now; and Julius too busy at our Hall of
Natural History. But just wait until Dan Cupid starts shooting again,
and watch things whiz!"




XVIII


Sarah, walking along past City Park on a raw, cold night, found a
tiny,--oh so tiny,--puppy, whining, shaking and crying with cold.
Picking up that small bunch of babyhood, Sarah was in quandary as just
what to do; but Priscilla Standish, coming along, said:--

"Oh! Poor baby!! Who owns him, Sarah?"

"I don't know; but say! Wouldn't your Ma----"

"My Ma _would!!_ Bring him along, and wrap your cloak around him. It's
awfully cold for so young a puppy."

So Lady Standish, with that "back-yard zoo" soon had his quaking
babyship lapping good warm milk, and a stumpy tail wagging as only
a tiny puppy's stumpy tail _can_ wag. Along towards six o'clock a
vigorous pounding on Lady Standish's front door brought Priscilla, to
find Old Bill Simpkins with a tiny, wildly sobbing girl of about four.
Walking into Lady Standish's parlor, Simpkins said:--

"This kid has lost a-a-a-crittur; I think it was a pup, wasn't it,
kid?"

A vigorous up and down bobbing of a small shock of auburn hair.

"So," said Simpkins, "I thought it might show up in your back-yard
gang."

"It has, Bill, you _old grouch!!_" for Lady Standish, as about all of
Branton Hills' grown-ups, was in school with Bill. "It's all right,
now, and warm and cuddly. Don't cry, Mary darling. Priscilla will bring
in your puppy."

As that happy baby sat crooning to that puppy, also a baby, Old Bill
had to snort out:--

"Huh! A lot of fuss about a pup, I'll say!"

"Oh, _pooh-pooh_, Bill Simpkins!" said Lady S. "Why _shouldn't_ a child
croon to a puppy? Folks bring all kinds of animals to my back yard, if
sick or hurt. Want to walk around my zoo?"

"_No!!_ No zoos for Councilman Simpkins! Animals ain't worth so much
fuss!"

"Pshaw, Bill! You talk ridiculously! I wish you could know of about
half of my works. I want to show you a big Angora cat. A dog bit its
foot so I put a balm on it and wound it with cotton----"

"You put _balm_ on a _cat's_ foot!! _Bah!_"

But Lady Standish didn't mind Old Bill's ravings having known him so
long; so said:--

"Oh, how's that old corn of yours? Can't I put a balm----"

"_No!_ You cannot! Mary, bring your pup; I'm going along."

As a happy tot was passing out that big, kindly front door, Sarah
said:--

"Was Councilman Simpkins always so grouchy, Lady Standish?"

"No. Not until John Gadsby 'cut him out' and won Lady Gadsby."

"Aha!! And a Ho, Ho!!" said Sarah, laughing gayly. "So folks had
what you call 'affairs' way back, just as today!" and also laughing
inwardly, at what Lucy had said about this kindly Lady Standish and His
Honor.

Ah! That good old schoolday, now so long past! How it bobs up,
now-a-days, if you watch a young lad and a happy, giggling lass
holding hands or laughing uproariously at youthful witticisms. And how
diaphanous and almost imaginary that far-back day looks, if that girl
with whom you stood up and said "I do," laughs, if you try a bit of
romantic kissing, and says:--

"Why, John! How silly! You act actually childish!!"

       *       *       *       *       *

And now it won't do any harm to hark back a bit on this history, to
find how our big Night School is doing. Following that first graduation
day, many and many a child, and adult, too, had put in hours on
various nights; and if you visit it you will find almost as many forms
of instruction going on as you will find pupils; for thousands of
folks today know of topics which, with a bit of study, could turn out
profitably. Now Branton Hills had, as you know, built this school for
public instruction; and, as with all such institutions, visiting days
occur. And _what_ a display of goods and workmanship! And what bright,
happy pupils, standing proudly back of it! For mankind knows hardly a
joy which will surpass that of approval of his work.

Gadsby's party first took in a wood-working shop; finding small stands
which fit so happily into many a living room nook; book racks for walls
or floor; moth-proof bins, smoking stands, many with fancy uprights
or inlaid tops; high chairs for tiny tots; arm chairs for old folks;
cribs, tobacco humidors, stools, porch and lawn swings, ballbats,
rolling pins, mixing boards; in fact about anything that a man can
fashion from wood.

As an indication of practical utility coming from such public
instruction, a man told Gadsby:--

"I didn't know much about wood-working tools until I got into this
class. This thing I am making would cost about thirty dollars to
buy, but all it cost, so far, is two dollars and a half, for wood and
glass," which Gadsby thought was worth knowing about; as so many of his
Council had put forth so many complaints against starting such a school
without charging for instruction. In an adjoining room His Honor's
party found boys banging and pounding happily; and, if you should
ask,--noisily,--on brasswork: making bowls, trays, lamp standards,
photograph stands, book supports and similar artistic things. Across
from that was a blacksmith shop, with its customary flying sparks and
sizzling cooling-vats.

But, by going upstairs, away from all this din, Gadsby, humming
happily, found Sarah and Lucy, Nancy and Kathlyn amidst a roomful of
girls doing dainty fancy-work. And what astonishing ability most of
that group _did_ show! Nancy bought a baby-cap which was on a par with
anything in Branton Hills' shops; and though Kathlyn said it was "just
too cunning for anything", John Smith's bungalow didn't contain anybody
(just now!) whom it would fit.

But Lady Gadsby, with a party of Branton Hills matrons, was calling
for Gadsby to hurry down a long corridor to a loom-room, saying that
such dainty rugs, mats and scarfs of cotton and silk hung all around
on walls or racks, it was truly astonishing that girls could do such
first-class work, having had long hours of labor in Broadway's shops
all day.

Although most of our standard occupations found room for activity, an
occasional oddity was run across. So His Honor's party found two boys
and two girls working at that always fascinating art of glass-blowing.
And what a dainty trick it is! And what an opportunity to burn a thumb
or two, if you don't wait for things to cool! Things of charming form
_and_ fragility, grow as by a magician's wand, from small glass tubings
of various colors. Birds with glorious wings, ships of crystal sailing
on dark billows, tiny buildings in a thick glass ball which upon
agitation, stirs up a snowstorm which softly lands on pink roof-tops;
many a fancy drinking glass and bowl, oil lamps, ash trays, and gaudy
strings of tiny crystal balls for adorning party gowns. And did Nancy
want to buy out this shop? And did Frank doubt his ability to do so?
And did Kathlyn ask: "How about it, Johnny?" and did John Smith say:
"Nothing doing"? It was just that. But it only shows that good old
Branton Hills' inclination for aiding anything which looks worthy; and
such a school I know you will admit, looks that way.

Tramping upstairs, still again, Gadsby and party found a class so
varying from all downstairs as to bring forth murmurs of joy, for this
was known as "Music Floor"; upon which was taught all forms of that
most charming of all arts--from solo work to community singing, from
solitary violin pupil to a full brass band. On our party's arrival,
Lucy, Doris and Virginia, hurrying from classrooms, sang, in trio, that
soft, slow Italian song, "O Solo Mio;" and, as Gadsby proudly said,
"Not for many a day had such _music_ rung out in Branton Hills;" for
most girls, if in training with a practical vocalist, _can_ sing; and
most charmingly, too.

In a far room was a big string outfit of banjos, mandolins and guitars,
happily strumming out a smart, throbbing Spanish fandango, until His
Honor could not avoid a swinging of body and tapping of foot; causing
Lady Gadsby to laugh, saying:--

"Rhythm has a mighty grip on Zulus, I am told."

To which our swaying Mayor said:--

"Anyway, a Zulu has a lot of fun out of it. If singing, playing and
dancing could only crowd out sitting around and moping, folks would
find that a Zulu can hand us a tip or two on happy living."

But all music is not of string form; so, in a big auditorium, our party
found a full brass band of about fifty boys, with a man from Branton
Hills' Municipal Band as instructor. Now as Gadsby was, as you boys
say, "not at all bad" on a big bass horn in his youthful days, this
band instructor, thinking of it, was asking him to "sit it" and play.
So, as Lady Gadsby, two girls, and two sons-in-law sat smiling and
giggling in a front row, and as fifty boys could hardly play, from
laughing, that big horn got such a blasting that it was practically a
horn solo! And Nancy, doubling up from giggling, said:--

"D-d-daddy! If-f-f-f B-b-b-barnum's circus hits town, you must join its
cl-cl-clown band!"

But I had to rush this happy party out of that building, as an awful
thing was occurring but a block from it; which told its own story by
a lurid light, flashing through windows; clanging gongs, shrilling
horns and running, shouting crowds; for an old, long-vacant factory
building just across from City Hall, was blazing furiously. Rushing
along Broadway was that "motor thing," with Clancy and Dowd clinging
wildly on a running board. Pulling up at a hydrant, Clancy said to His
Honor:--

"As I was a-hangin' onto this dom thing, a-thinkin' it was going to
bang into a big jam at two crossroads, I says, By Gorra! that big pair
of blacks wouldn't bang into _nuthin'!_ But this currazy contraption!
It ain't got no brain--no nuthin', no soul--nuthin' but halitosis!!"

As Gadsby took a long look at Clancy's "dom thing," a vision was
wafting through his mind of a calm, sunny patch of land, way out
in Branton Hills' suburbs, on which day by day, two big blacks and
two big roans could--anyway, taking all things into account, a big
conflagration, with its din, rush and panic, is no spot for such
animals as "Big Four." As for Old Bill's squawk about animals "ruining
our paving," Gadsby thought that was but small talk, for paving,
anyway, can't last for long. But, that _is_ a glorious spot, way out
amongst our hills!

Gadsby took his party to a room in City Hall from which that burning
factory was in plain sight; and as Nancy and Kathlyn stood watching
that awful sight a big wall, crashing down, had a crowd rushing to that
spot.

A man's form was brought out to a patrol wagon; and a boy, rushing
past City Hall, sang out to Gadsby:--

"It's Old Man Donaldson!!"

Tiny Nancy, almost swooning, said:--

"Donaldson? Oh, Kathy! That's Lucy's Dad, of Company Two, you know!"
and Frank and John Smith shot wildly downstairs to find out about it.
In an instant a sobbing girlish form was dashing madly from that Night
School building towards our Municipal Hospital. It was Lucy; bright,
always laughing Lucy; but half an hour ago singing so happily in that
girls' trio.

As that big factory was still blazing furiously, Frank and John, coming
in, said:--

"It was only a scalp wound, and a sprung wrist. Lucy is coming
upstairs, now."

Lucy, coming in, badly blown from running and fright, said:--

"That wall caught Daddy; but it was so old and thin it didn't crush
him. Oh! _How_ I worry if that alarm rings!"

"But," put in Nancy, "it's _man's_ work. Pshaw!! What good am _I_? Why,
I couldn't do a thing around that factory, right now! Look at my arm!
About as big as a ball bat!" and as Frank took that sad, tiny form in
his arms, Gadsby said:--

"All throughout Natural History, Nancy, you will find man built
big and strong, and woman small and frail. That is so that man can
obtain food for his family, and that woman may nourish his offspring.
But today, I am sorry to say, you'll find girls working hard, in
gymnasiums, fondly hoping to attain man's muscular parity. How silly!!
It's going straight against all natural laws. Girls _can_ find a lot of
bodily good in gymnasiums, I'll admit! but _not_ that much. And as for
your 'ball-bat' arm, as you call it, what of it? You'd look grand, now
wouldn't you, with Frank's big oak-branch arms hanging way down to your
shins. But that ball-bat arm can curl around your tiny baby as softly
as a down pillow. Aw, darling! _Don't_ say you can't do anything;
for _I_ know you can. How about our old Organization of Youth days?
You,----"

And Nancy, now laughing, said, gaily:--

"Oho! Our old Organization! What fun it was! But, Daddy, I don't know
of any young crowd following us up."

"No. Our young folks of today think such things too much work;" and,
as that old factory was but a mass of ruins now, and midnight was
approaching, Gadsby's family was soon in that mythical Land of Nod, in
which no horns blow, no sparks fall; only occasionally a soft gurgling
from a crib in Nancy's bungalow.




XIX


It is an odd kink of humanity which cannot find any valuation in
spots of natural glory. But such kinks do run riot in Man's mind,
occasionally, and Branton Hills ran up against such, on a Council
night; for a bill was brought up by Old Bill Simpkins for disposal of
City Park to a land company, for building lots! At first word of such
a thought, Gadsby was totally dumb, from an actual impossibility of
thinking that any man, bringing up such a bill, wasn't plumb crazy!

"_What!_ Our main Park; including our Zoo?"

"Just that," said Simpkins. "Just a big patch of land, and a foolish
batch of animals that do nobody any good. You can't hitch a lion up to
a city dump cart, you know; nor a hippopotamus to a patrol wagon. What
good is that bunch of hair and horns, anyway? And that park! _Bah!!_
Just grass, grass, grass! Branton Hills pays for planting that grass,
pays for sprinkling it, pays for cutting it--and _throws it away!_ So I
say, put it into building lots, and draw good, solid cash from it."

An Italian Councilman, Tony Bandamita, was actually boiling during
this outburst; and, in a flash, as Simpkins quit, was up, shouting:--

"I gotta four bambinos. My bambinos playa in thatta park: run, jumpa
and rolla. Grow bigga an' strong. My woman say no coulda do thatta if
playa all day on bricka walks. I say no buncha land sharks buya thatta
Park!! How many you guys go to it, anyway? Huh? Notta many! But _go!!_
Walk around; sniffa its blossoms; look at grand busha; sit on softa
grass! You do thatta, an' _I_ know you not stick no building on it!!"

So, at Mayor Gadsby's instigation, Council did not ballot on Simpkins'
bill; and said it would go, as Tony thought only right, and "look atta
gooda busha."

In a day or two this pompous body of solons was strolling about that
big park. No man with half a mind could fail to thrill at its vistas of
shrubs, ponds, lawns, arbors, fancy fowl, small pavilions and curving
shady pathways. As Gadsby was "takinga his owna looka," Old Bill
Simpkins, coming a-snorting and a-fussing along, sang out, gruffly:--

"All right; this is it! This is that grand patch of grass that pays
Branton Hills no tax!"

But Gadsby was thinking--and thinking hard, too. Finally saying:--

"Bill, supposing that any day you should walk along that big Pathway
known in Sunday School as 'Our Straight But Narrow Way.' You would find
coming towards you, all sorts of folks: a king, roaring past in his big
chariot, a capitalist with his hands full of bonds, an old, old lady,
on a crutch. Such passings would bring to you various thoughts. But,
supposing it was a possibility that you saw _Bill Simpkins_ coming your
way. Aha! What an opportunity to watch that grouchy old--"

"That _what_?"

"I'll say it again: that grouchy old crab. How you _would_ gawk at him,
that most important of all folks, to you. How you would look at his
clothing, his hat, his boots! That individual would pass an inquiry
such as you had not thought it a possibility to put a man up against.
Bill, I think that if you _should_ pass Councilman Simpkins on that Big
Pathway, you would say: 'What a grouchy old crittur that was!'"

Old Bill stood calmly during this oration, and, looking around that big
park, said:--

"John, you know how to talk, all right, all right. I'll admit that
things you say do do a lot of good around this town. But if I should
run across this guy you talk about, on that vaporous highway, or
'boardwalk', as _I_ should call it,--I'd say, right out good and loud:
Hi! You!! Hurry back to Branton Hills and put up a block of buildings
in that silly park!" and Gadsby, walking away, saw that an inborn grouch
is as hard to dig out as a wisdom tooth.

Now this Council's visit on this particular day, was a sly plan of
Gadsby's, for His Honor is, you know, Youth's Champion, and having
known many an occasion on which Youth has won out against Council
opposition. So, our big City officials, strolling around that park,
soon saw a smooth lawn upon which sat, stood, or ran, almost a
thousand small tots of from four to six. In dainty, flimsy outfits,
many carrying fairy wands, it was a sight so charming as to thaw out
a brass idol! Amidst this happy party stood a tall shaft, or mast,
having hanging from its top a thick bunch of long ribbons, of pink,
lilac, gray, and similar dainty colors; and around it stood thirty
tots--thirty tiny fists all agog to grasp thirty gay ribbons. Old Bill
took a look, and said, growlingly, to His Honor:--

"What's all this stuff, anyway?"

"Bill, and Branton Hills' Council," said Gadsby, "today is May
Day--that day so symbolic of budding blossoms, mating birds and sunny
sky. You all know, or _ought_ to, of that charming custom of childhood
of toddling round and round a tall mast in and out, in and out,--thus
winding gay ribbons about it in a spiral. That is but a small part
of what this Park can do for Branton Hills. But it is an important
part; for happy childhood grows up into happy adults, and happy
adults"--looking right at Councilman Simpkins--"_can_ form a happy City
Council."

Now a kid is always a kid; and a kid knows just how any sport should
go. So, just by luck, a tot who was to hold a gay ribbon didn't show
up; and that big ring stood waiting, for that round-and-round march
_just couldn't_ start with a ribbon hanging down! But a kid's mind is
mighty quick and sharp; and a small tot of four had that kind of mind,
saying:--

"Oh! That last ribbon! Isn't anybody going to hold it?"

Now historians shouldn't laugh. Historians should only put down what
occurs. But I, _your_ historian of Branton Hills, not only had to
laugh, but to _roar_; for this tot, worrying about that hanging ribbon,
saw our big pompous Council group looking on. Now a Council is nothing
to a tot of four; just a man or two, standing around. So, trotting up
and grasping Old Bill's hand, this tot said:

"_You'll_ hold it, won't you?"

"_What!!_" and Simpkins was all colors on throat and brow as Branton
Hills' Council stood, grinning. But that baby chin was straining up,
and a pair of baby arms was pulling, oh, _so_ hard; and, in a sort
of coma, big, pompous, grouchy Councilman Simpkins took that hanging
ribbon! A band struck up a quick march, and round and round trod that
happy, singing ring, with Old Bill looming up as big as a mountain
amongst its foothills! Laugh? I thought His Honor would _burst!_

As that ribbon spiral got wound, Simpkins, coming back, said, with a
growl:--

"I was afraid I would tramp on a kid or two in that silly stunt."

"It wasn't silly, Bill," said Gadsby. "It was _grand!_" And Tony
Bandamita sang out:--

"Gooda work, Councilmanna! My four bambinos walka right in fronta you,
and twista ribbons!"

Simpkins, though, would only snort, and pass on.




XX


On a warm Sunday, Kathlyn and Julius, poking around in Branton Hills'
suburbs, occasionally found an odd formation of fossilization,
installing it amidst our Hall of Natural History's displays. Shortly
following such an installation, a famous savant on volcanic activity
noting a most propitious rock formation amongst Julius' groups, thought
of cutting into it; for ordinary, most prosaic rocks _may_ contain
surprising information; and, upon arriving at Branton Hills' railway
station, ran across old Pat Ryan, czar of its trunk room.

"Ah, my man! I want to find a lapidary."

"A what?"

"It isn't a 'what,' it's a lapidary."

"Lapidary, is it? Lapidary, lapidary, lapi--lapi--la--. No, I----"

Now this savant was in a hurry, and said, snappily:--

"But a city as big as Branton Hills _has_ a lapidary, I trust!"

"Oh, Branton Hills has a lot of things. But, wait a bit! It ain't a
lavatory what you want, is it?"

But at this instant, to old Pat's salvation, Kathlyn, passing by,
said:--

"All right, Pat. I know about this;" and, both taking a taxi, old Pat
walking round and round, scratching his bald crown, was murmuring:

"Lapid----Aho! I got it! It's probably a crittur up at that zoo! I
ain't forgot that hop, skip and jump, walloping Australian tornado! And
now His Honor has put in a lapidary!! I think I'll go up with that old
canvas bag! But why all sich high-brow stuff in naming critturs? This
lapidary thing might turn out only a rat, or a goofy bug!"

But that _fairy_ bug, Dan Cupid, goofy or not, as you wish, was
buzzing around again; and, though this story is not of wild, romantic
infatuations, in which rival villains fight for a fair lady's hand, I
am bound to say that Cupid has put on an act varying _much_ from his
works in Gadsby's mansion; for _this_ arrow from his bow caught two
young folks to whom a dollar bill was as long, broad and high as City
Hall. Both had to work for a living; but by saving a bit, off and on,
Sarah Young, who, you know, with Priscilla Standish first thought of
our Night School, and Paul Johnson, who did odd jobs around town, such
as caring for lawns, painting and "man-of-all-work," had put by a small
bank account. Paul was an orphan, as was Sarah, who had grown up with
a kindly old man, Tom Young; his "old woman," dying at about Sarah's
fourth birthday. (That word "old woman," is common amongst Irish folks,
and is not at all ungracious. It _had_ to crawl into this story,
through orthographical taboos, you know.) But Sarah, now a grown young
lady, had that natural longing for a spot in which a woman might find
that joy of living, in having "things to do for just us two" if bound
by Cupid's gift--matrimony.

Many a day in passing that big church of Nancy's grand display, or
Gadsby's rich mansion, Sarah had thought fondly about such things; for,
as with any girl, marrying amidst blossoms, glamour and organ music was
a goal, to attain which was actual bliss. But such rituals call for
cash; and lots of it, too. Also, Old Tom Young had no room in any way
fit for such an occasion.

So Sarah would walk past, possibly a bit sad, but looking forward to
a coming happy day. And it wasn't so far off. My, no! As Nancy had
thought April was "a million months long," Sarah's days swung past in a
dizzy whirl; during which, in company with Paul on Saturday nights, a
small thing or two was happily bought for that "Cupid's Coop," as both
found a lot of fun in calling it. But Sarah naturally had girl chums,
just as Nancy and Kathlyn had; for most of that old Organization was
still in town; and many a gift found its way to this girl who, though
poor in worldly goods, was as rich as old King Midas in a bright, happy
disposition; for anybody who didn't know that magic captivation of
Sarah Young's laugh, that rich crown of light, fluffy hair, or that
grand, proud, upright walk, wasn't amongst Branton Hills' population.
Paul, scratching around shady paths, a potato patch or two, front
yards, back yards, and city parks, was known to many an old family man;
who upon knowing of his coming variation in living conditions, thought
way, way back to his own romantic youth; so Paul, going to Sarah at
night, brought small but practical gifts for that "coop."

As Sarah and Paul stood in front of City Hall on a hot July night,
Sarah scanning Branton Hills' "Post" for "vacant rooms," who should
walk up but His Honor! And that kindly hand shot out with:--

"Aha! If it isn't Paul and Sarah! What's Sarah hunting for, Paul?"

"Sarah is looking for a room for us, sir."

"_Us_? Did you say 'us'? Oho! H-mmm! I'm on! How soon will you want it?"

"Oh," said Sarah, blushing, "not for about a month."

"But," said His Honor, "you shouldn't start out in _a_ room. You would
want from four to six I should think."

Sarah, still ogling that "rooms" column said, softly:--

"Four to six rooms? That's just grand if you can afford such. But,----"

"Wait!" said Gadsby, who, taking Paul's and Sarah's arms, and strolling
along, told of a small six-room bungalow of his, just around from
Nancy's.

"And you two will pay just nothing a month for it. It's yours, from
front porch to roof top, as a gift to two of my most loyal pals."

And instantly a copy of Branton Hills' "Post" was blowing across
Broadway in a fluky July wind!

Now, as this young pair was to start out frugally, it wouldn't do to
lay out too much for, as Sarah said, "about forty words by a pastor,
and a kiss."

So only Priscilla stood up with Sarah; and Bill Gadsby, in all his
sartorial glory, with Paul, in Parson Brown's small study; both girls
in dainty morning clothing; Sarah carrying a bunch of gay nasturtiums,
claiming that such warm, bright colorings would add as much charm to
that short occasion as a thousand dollars' worth of orchids. Now, such
girls as Sarah, with that capacity for finding satisfaction so simply,
don't grow as abundantly as hollyhocks--and Paul found that Gadsby's
old Organization was a group knowing what a dollar is: just a dollar.




XXI


Occasionally a sight bobs up without warning in a city, which starts
a train of thought, sad or gay, according to how you look at it. And
so, Lucy, Priscilla, and Virginia Adams, walking along Broadway, saw a
crowd around a lamp post, upon which was a patrol-box; and, though our
girls don't customarily follow up such sights, Lucy saw a man's form
sprawling flat up against that post, as limp as a rag. Priscilla said,
in disgust:--

"_Ugh!!_ It's Norman Antor! Drunk again!!" and Virginia, hastily
grasping both girls' arms and hurrying past, said:--

"So!! His vacation in jail didn't do him any good! But, still, it's
too bad. Norman is a good looking, manly lad, with a good mind and a
thorough schooling. And _now_ look at him! A _common drunk!!_"

Priscilla was sad, too, saying:--

"Awful! Awful for so young a chap. What is his Dad doing now?"

"Still in jail," was all Virginia could say; adding sadly: "I do
pity poor young Mary, who sold Antor's liquor, you know. Doris says
that lots of school-girls snub that kid. Now that's not right. It's
downright _horrid!_ Mary was brought up in what you almost might call
a pool of liquor, and I don't call it fair to snub a child for that;
for you know that, not only 'Past' Councilman Antor, but also _Madam_
Antor, got what our boys call 'lit-up' on many public occasions.
Antor's pantry was _full_ of it! Which way could that poor kid look
without finding it? You know Mary is not so old as most of us; and I'm
just going to _go_ to that child and try to bring a ray of comfort into
that young mind. That rum-guzzling Antor family!! _Ugh!!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

But a city also has amusing sights; and our trio ran plump into that
kind, just around a turn; for, standing on a soap box, shouting a
high-sounding jargon of rapidly shot words, was Arthur Rankin, an
original Organization lad; a crowd of boys, a man or two, and a woman
hanging laughingly around. Our trio's first inkling as to what it was
all about was Arthur's hail to Priscilla:--

"Aha! Branton Hills' fair womanhood is now approaching!!"

Now if our trio didn't know Arthur so thoroughly, such girls might
balk at this publicity. But Priscilla and Arthur had had many a
"slapping match" long ago, arising from childhood's spats; Priscilla
originally living on an adjoining lot, and was Arthur's "first girl;"
which according to his old Aunt Anna, "was just silly puppy stuff!" So
nobody thought anything of this public hail and Arthur was raving on
about "which puts an instant stop to all pain; will rid you of anything
from dandruff to ingrowing nails; will build up a strong body from a
puny runt; will grow hair on a billiard-ball scalp, and _taboo_ it on a
lady's chin; will put a glamorous gloss on tooth or nail; stop stomach
growls; oil up kinky joints, and bring you to happy, smiling days
of Utopian bliss! How many, Priscilla? Only a dollar a box; two for
dollar-sixty!"

Priscilla, laughing, said:--

"Not any today, thank you, Art! All I want is a pair of juicy lamb
chops--a dish of onions--a dish of squash--a dish of carrots--a
pint of milk--potato-chips--hot biscuits--cold slaw--custard
pudding--nuts--raisins----"

"_Whoa_, Priscilla! Hop right up on this box! I know that word-slinging
ability of old" and as that crowd was fading away, Priscilla said:--

"This is odd work for you, Arthur; _you_ so good a draughtsman. What's
up?"

And Arthur, a happy, rollicking boy, having always had all such things
as most boys had, with a Dad making good pay as a railroad conductor,
told sadly of an awful railway smash-up which took "Dad" away from four
small Rankin orphans, whom Arthur was now supporting; and a scarcity of
jobs in Branton Hills and of trips to surrounding towns, always finding
that old sign out: "No Work Today." Of this soap box opportunity
bobbing up, which was now bringing in good cash. So our girls found
that our Branton Hills boys didn't shirk work of any kind, if brought
right up against want.




XXII


But what about Branton Hills' municipal affairs, right now? In two
months it was to ballot on who should sit in past-Councilman Antor's
chair; and a campaign was on which was actually sizzling. And in
what a contrast to our city's start! For it has grown rapidly;
and, in comparison to that day upon which a thousand ballots was
a big out-pouring of popular clamor now many politicians had City
Hall aspirations. And _who_ do you think was running for Council,
now? William Gadsby! Popularly known as Bill! Bill, Branton Hills'
famous dandy; Bill, that consummation of all Branton Hills girls'
most romantic wish; Bill, that "outdoor part" of Branton Hills' most
aristocratic tailor shop! Naturally, opposing groups fought for that
vacancy; part of our population clamoring loudly for Bill, but with
many just as strongly against him. So it was:--

"Put Bill Gadsby in!! Bill has all our Mayor's good points! Bill will
work for all that is upright and good!"

And also:--

"_What!_ Bill Gadsby? Is this town plumb crazy? Say! If you put that
fop in City Hall you'll find all its railings flapping with pink satin
ribbons; a janitor at its main door, squirting vanilla on all who go
in; and its front lawn will turn into a pansy farm! Put a _man_ in City
Hall, not a sissy who thinks out 'upsy-downsy, insy-outsy' camping
suits for girls!"

But though this didn't annoy Bill, it _did_ stir up Nancy, with:--

"Oh! That's just an abomination! _Such_ talk about so grand a young
chap! But I just saw a billboard with a sign saying: 'Bill Gadsby for
Council;' so, probably I shouldn't worry, for Bill is as good as in."

"Baby," said Gadsby, kindly, "that's only a billboard, and billboards
don't put a man in City Hall. It's _ballots_, darling; _thousands_ of
ballots, that fill Council chairs."

"But, Daddy, I'm going to root for Bill. I'll stand up on a stump, or
in a tip-cart, or----"

"Whoa! Wait a bit!" and Gadsby sat down by his "baby girl," saying:
"You can't go on a stumping campaign without knowing a lot about
municipal affairs; which you don't. Any antagonist who knows about
such things would out-talk you without half trying. No, darling, this
political stuff is too big for you. You just look out for things in
that small bungalow of yours, and allow Branton Hills to fight to put
Bill in. You know my old slogan:--'Man at a city's front; woman at a
cabin door.'"

And Nancy, fondly stroking his hand, said:

"Man at a city's front! What a grand post for a man! A city, a big,
rushing, dashing, slamming, banging, boiling mass of humanity! A city;
with its bright, happy, sunny parks; and its sad, dark slums; its rich
mansions and its shanty-town shacks; its shops, inns, shows, courts,
airports, railway stations, hospitals, schools, church groups, social
clubs, and,--and,--_Oh!_ _What_ a magic visualization of human thought
it is! But it is as a small child. It looks for a strong arm to support
its first toddlings; for adult minds to pilot it around many pitfalls;
and onward, _onward!!_ To a shining goal!!" and Nancy's crown of rich
brown hair sank lovingly in Gadsby's lap.

During this outburst Gadsby had sat dumb; but finally saying, proudly:--

"So, ho! My baby girl has grown up! Dolls and sand-digging tools
don't call, as of old. And small, dirty paws, and a tiny smudgy chin,
transform, almost in a twinkling into charming hands and a chin of
maturity. My, my! It was but a month or two ago that you, in pig-tails
and gingham----"

"No, Daddy! It was a _mighty long_ month or two ago; and it's not
pig-tails and gingham, now, but a husband and a baby."

"All right, kid; but as you grow old, you'll find that, in glancing
backwards, months look mighty short; and small tots grow up, almost in
a night. A month _from now_ looks awfully far off; but _last month_?
Pff! That was only last night!"

Thus did Nancy and His Honor talk, until a vigorous honking at his curb
told of Frank, "looking for a cook," for it was six o'clock.




XXIII


Any man with so kindly a disposition toward Youth as has brought our
Mayor forward in Branton Hills' history, may, without warning, run
across an occasion which holds an opportunity for adding a bit of joy
in living. So, as Gadsby stood, on a chilly fall day, in front of that
big glass building which was built for a city florist, admiring a
charming display of blossoming plants, a small girl, still in Grammar
School, said, shyly:--

"Hulloa."

"Hulloa, you. School out?"

"On Saturdays, school is always out."

"That's so; it _is_ Saturday, isn't it? Going in?"

"_In!!_ My, no! _I_ can't go into that fairyland!"

"No? Why not, pray?"

"Aw! I dunno; but nobody has took kids in."

"Took? Took? Say, young lady, you must study your grammar book. Branton
Hills schools don't----"

"Uh-huh; I know. But a kid just can't--"

"By golly! A kid _can!_ Grab my hand."

Now, many a fairy book has told, in glowing words, of childhood's joys
and thrills at amazing sights; but _no_ fairy book _could_ show, in
cold print, what Gadsby ran up against as that big door shut, and a
child stood stock still--and _dumb!_ Two small arms hung limply down,
against a poor, oh, _so_ poor skirt; and two big staring brown orbs
took in that vision of floral glory, which is found in just that kind
of a big glass building on a cold, raw autumn day.

Gadsby said not a word; slowly strolling down a path amidst thousands
of gladioli; around a turn, and up a path, along which stood pots and
pots of fuchsias, salvias and cannas; and to a cross-path, down which
was a big flat pansy patch, tubs of blossoming lilacs, and stiff,
straight carnations. Not a word from Gadsby, for his mind was on that
small bunch of rapturous joy just in front of him. But, finally, just
to pry a bit into that baby mind, His Honor said:--

"Looks kind of good, don't it?"

A tiny form shrunk down about an inch; and an also tiny bosom, rising
and falling in a thralldom of bliss, finally put forth a long, long,--

"_O-h-h-h-h!!_"

It was so long that Gadsby was in a quandary as to how such small lungs
could hold it.

Now in watching this tot thrilling at its first visit to such a world
of floral glory, Gadsby got what boys call "a hunch;" and said:--

"You don't find blossoms in your yard this month, _do_ you?"

If you know childhood you know that thrills don't last long without a
call for information. And Gadsby got such a call, with:--

"No, sir. Is this God's parlor?"

Now Gadsby wouldn't, for anything, spoil a childish thought; so said,
kindly:--

"It's part of it. God's parlor is awfully big, you know."

"_My_ parlor is awfully _small_; and not any bloss---- Oh! Wouldn't
God----?"

Gadsby's hunch was now working, full tilt; and so, as this loving
family man, having had four kids of his own, and this tot from a poor
family with its "awfully small" parlor,--had trod this big glass
building's paths again and again; round and round, an almost monstrous
sigh from an almost bursting tiny bosom, said:--

"I'll think of God's parlor, always and always and _always!!_" and
Gadsby, on glancing upwards, saw a distinct drooping and curving of
many stalks; which is a plant's way of bowing to a child. And, at
Branton Hills' following Council night a motion was---- But I said
Gadsby had a hunch. So, not only _this_ schoolgirl's awfully small
parlor, but many such throughout Branton Hills' poor districts, soon
found a "big girl" from Gadsby's original Organization of Youth at its
front door with plants from that big glass building, in which our City
Florist works in God's parlor. (P.S. _Go_ with a child to _your_ City
Florist's big glass building. It's a _duty!_)




XXIV


I am now going back to my saying that a city has all kinds of
goings-on; both sad and gay. So, as His Honor sat on his porch on a
warm spring day, a paragraph in Branton Hills' "Post" brought forth
such a vigorous "_Huh!_" that Lady Gadsby was curious, asking:--

"What is it?"

So Gadsby said:--"What do you think of _this_? It says:--'In a wild
swaying dash down Broadway last night at midnight, past-Councilman
Antor's car hit a hydrant, killing him and Madam Antor instantly.
Highway Patrolman Harry Grant, who was chasing that car in from our
suburbs, says both horribly drunk, Antor grazing four cars, Madam
shouting and singing wildly, with Grant arriving too tardily to ward
off that final crash.'"

Now Lady Gadsby was, first of all, a woman; and so got up quickly,
saying:--

"Oh!! I must go down to poor young Mary, _right off!_" and Gadsby sat
tapping his foot, saying:--

"So Antor's pantry probably still holds that stuff. Too bad. But, oh,
that darling Mary! Just got into High School! Not long ago Lucy told
us of girls snubbing that kid; but I trust that, from this horror, our
Branton Hills girls will turn from snubbing to pity. This account says
that Madam Antor also was drunk. A _woman_ drunk!! And riding with a
rum-sot man at a car's controls! _Woman!_ From History's dawn, Man's
soft, fond, loving pal! _Woman!_ For whom wars of blood and agony
cut Man down as you would mow a lawn! _Woman!_ To whom infancy and
childhood look for all that is upright and good! It's too bad; too bad!"

As in all such affairs you will always find two factions talking.
Talking about what? Just now, about _Norman_ Antor. What would this
wiping out of his folks do to him? Norman was now living with Mary
and two aunts who, coming from out of town, would try to plan for our
two orphans; try to plan for Norman; Norman, brought up in a pool of
liquor! Norman: tall, dark and manly and with a most ingratiating
disposition----if not drunk. But nobody could say. A group would claim
that "this fatality will bring him out of it;" but his antagonists
thought that "That guy will always drink."

A day or two from that crash, Nancy, coming into Gadsby's parlor, found
Lucy talking with Lady Gadsby, Lucy asking:--

"Nancy, who is with young Mary Antor now? That pair of aunts wouldn't
stay, with all that liquor around."

"I just found out," said Nancy. "Mary is living with Old Lady Flanagan"
and Lucy, though sad, had to laugh just a bit, saying:--

"Ha, ha! Old Lady Flanagan! What a _circus_ I had trying to pry a zoo
donation from that poor soul's skimpy funds! But, Nancy, Mary is in
mighty good hands. That loving old Irish lady is a trump!"




XXV


Along in April, Gadsby sat finishing his morning toast as a boy,
rushing in, put a "Post" on his lap with a wild, boyish gasp of:--"_My
gosh_, Mayor Gadsby, _Look!!_" and Gadsby saw a word about a foot high.
It was W--A--R. Lady Gadsby saw it also, slowly sinking into a chair.
At that instant both Nancy and Kathlyn burst frantically in, Nancy
lugging Baby Lillian, now almost two, and a big load for so small a
woman, Nancy gasping out:--

"Daddy!! Must Bill and Julius and Frank and John,----"

Gadsby put down his "Post" and, pulling Nancy down onto his lap, said:--

"Nancy darling, Bill and Julius and Frank and John must. Old Glory is
calling, baby, and no Branton Hills boy will balk at _that_ call. It's
awful, but it's a fact, now."

Lady Gadsby said nothing, but Nancy and Kathlyn saw an ashy pallor
on that matronly brow; and Gadsby going out without waiting for his
customary kiss.

For what you might call an instant, Branton Hills, in blank, black
gloom, stood stock still. But not for long. Days got to flashing past,
with that awful sight of girls, out to lunch, saying:--

"Four from our shop; and that big cotton mill has _forty-six_ who will
go."

With Virginia saying:--

"About all that our boys talk about is uniforms, pay, transportation,
army corps, divisions, naval squadrons, and so on."

An occasional Branton Hills politician thought that it "might blow out
in a month or two;" but your Historian knows that it didn't; all of
that "blowing" consisting of blasts from that military clarion, calling
for mobilization.

       *       *       *       *       *

Days! Days! Days! Finally, on May Fourth, that day of tiny Nancy's big
church ritual, you know; that day, upon which any woman would look back
with romantic joy, Nancy, with Kathlyn, Lady Gadsby and His Honor,
stood at Branton Hills' big railway station, at which our Municipal
Band was drawn up; in back of which stood, in solid ranks, this city's
grand young manhood, Bill, Julius, Frank, John, Paul and Norman
standing just as straight and rigid as any. As that long, long troop
train got its signal to start,--but you know all about such sights,
going on daily, from our Pacific coast to Atlantic docks.

As it shot around a turn, and Gadsby was walking sadly toward City
Hall, a Grammar School boy hurrying up to him said:--

"_Wow!!_ I wish _I_ could go to war!"

"Hi!" said Gadsby. "If it isn't Kid Banks!"

"Aw! Cut that kid stuff! I'm _Allan_ Banks! Son of _Councilman_ Banks!"

"Oh, pardon. But you don't want to go to war, boy."

"_Aw! I do too!!_"

"But young boys _can't_ go to war."

"I know that; and I wish this will last until I grow so I _can_ go.
It's just grand! A big cannon says _Boom! Boom!_ and,--"

"Sit down on this wall, boy. I want to talk to you."

"All right. Shoot!"

"Now look, Allan. If this war should last until you grow up, just think
of how many _thousands_ of troops it would kill. How many grand, good
lads it would put right out of this world."

"Gosh! That's so, ain't it! I didn't think of guys dyin'."

"But a man _has_ to think of that, Allan. And _you_ will, as you grow
up. My two big sons just put off on that big troop train. I don't know
_how_ long Bill and Julius will stay away. Your big cannon might go
_Boom!_ and hit Bill or Julius. Do you know Frank Morgan, Paul Johnson
and John Smith? All right; that big cannon might hit that trio, too.
Nobody can say _who_ a cannon will hit, Allan. Now, you go right on
through Grammar School, and grow up into a big strong man, and don't
think about war;" and Gadsby, standing and gazing far off to Branton
Hills' charming hill district, thought: "I think _that_ will bust up a
wild young ambition!"

But that kid, turning back, sang out:--

"Say!! If this scrap stops, and a _big_ war starts,--_Aha_, boy! You
just watch Allan Banks! Son of Councilman Banks!!" and a small fist was
pounding viciously on an also small bosom.

"By golly!" said Gadsby, walking away, "that's Tomorrow talking!"

       *       *       *       *       *

So now this history will drift along; along through days and months;
days and months of that awful gnawing doubt; actually a paradox, for
it was a "conscious coma;" mornings on which Branton Hills' icy blood
shrank from looking at our city's "Post," for its casualty list was
rapidly--too rapidly,--growing. Days and days of our girlhood and
womanhood rolling thousands of long, narrow cotton strips; packing
loving gifts from many a pantry; Nancy and Kathlyn thinking constantly
of Frank and John; Lucy almost down and out from worrying about Paul;
Kathlyn knowing just how Julius is missing his Hall of Natural History,
and how its staff is praying for him; Nancy's radio shut down _tight_,
for so much as a thought of Station KBH was as a thrust of a sword.
Days. Days. Days of shouting orators, blaring bands, troops from far
away pausing at our big railway station, as girls, going through long
trains of cars, took doughnuts and hot drinks. In Gadsby's parlor
window hung that famous "World War flag" of nothing but stars; nobody
knowing at what instant a _gold_ star would show upon it. A star for
Bill; a star for Julius. Ah, Bill! Branton Hills' fop! Bill Gadsby now
in an ill-fitting and un-stylish khaki uniform.

Gadby's mansion had no brilliant night lights, now; just his parlor
lamp and a small light or two in hallways or on stairways. Only our
Mayor and his Lady, now worrying, worrying, worrying; but both of good,
staunch old Colonial stock; and "carrying on" with good old Plymouth
Rock stability; and Nancy's baby, Lillian, too young to ask why Grandma
"wasn't hungry," now; and didn't laugh so much.

Kathlyn got into our big hospital, this studious young lady's famous
biological and microscopic ability holding out an opportunity for most
practical work; for Branton Hills' shot-torn boys would soon start
drifting in. And thus it was; with Lucy, Sarah and Virginia inspiring
Branton Hills' womanhood to knit, knit, knit! You saw knitting on many
a porch; knitting in railway trains; knitting during band music in City
Park; knitting in shady arbors out at our big zoo; at many a woman's
club,--and,--_actually_, knitting _in church!!_ Finally a big factory,
down by our railway station, put out a call for "anybody, man or woman,
who wants to work on munitions;" and many a dainty Branton Hills girl
sat at big, unfamiliar stamping, punching, grinding, or polishing
outfits; tiring frail young backs and straining soft young hands;
knowing that this factory's output might,--and probably would,--rob a
woman across that big Atlantic of a husband or son,--but, still, it is
war!

Gadsby, smoking on his ivy-clad porch, as his Lady was industriously
knitting, said, in a sort of soliloquy:--

"War! That awful condition which a famous military man in command of a
division, long ago, said was synonymous with Satan and all his cohorts!
War! That awful condition of human minds coming down from way, _way_
back of all history; that vast void during which sympathy was not
known; during which animals fought with tooth, claw or horn; that vast
void during which wounds had no soothing balm, until thirst, agony or a
final swoon laid low a gigantic mammoth, or a tiny, gasping fawn! But
now, again, in this grand day of Man's magically growing brain, this
day of kindly crooning to infants in cribs; kindly talks to boys and
girls in school; and blood-tingling orations from thousands of pulpits
upon that Holy Command: 'Thou Shalt Not Kill,' now, _again_, Man is out
to kill his own kind." And Lady Gadsby could only sigh.




XXVI


As this story has shown, _Youth_, if adults will only admit that it has
any brains at all, will stand out, today, in a most promising light.
Philosophically, Youth is Wisdom in formation, and with many thoughts
startling to adult minds; and, industrially, this vast World's coming
stability is now, _today_, in its hands; growing slowly, as a blossom
grows from its bud. If you will furnish him with a thorough schooling,
you can plank down your dollar that Youth, _starting out_ from this
miraculous day, will not lag nor shirk on that coming day in which
old joints, rusty and crackling, must slow down; and, calling for an
oil can, you will find that Youth _only_, is that lubrication which
can run Tomorrow's World. But Youth must not go thinking that all its
plans will turn out all right; and young Marian Hopkins found this out.
Marian, you know, took part in our airport initiation. But Marian,
only a kid at that day, has grown up--or half-way up, anyway, and just
graduating from Grammar School; upon which big day a child "knows" as
much as any famous savant of antiquity! But, as this story runs in
skips and jumps, strict chronological continuity is not a possibility.
So, Marian is now half grown-up. Now that big airport, as you also
know, was just back of Marian's back yard; and as that yard was much
too big for anything that Marian's Dad could do with it, it was put
up for disposal. But nobody would go to look at it; to say nothing
of buying it. But Old Bill Simpkins, past antagonist of Gadsby's
Organization of Youth, did go out to look at it; but said, with his
customary growl:--

"Too many aircraft always roaring and zooming. Too far out of town. And
you ask too much for it, anyway."

But Marian thought that Branton Hills, as a municipality, should
own it; figuring that that airport would grow, and that yard was
practically a part of it, anyway. So Marian, going to His Honor, as
about anybody in town did, without an instant's dallying, "told him,"
(!) what his Council should do.

"But," said Gadsby, "what a City Council should do, and what it _will_
do, don't always match up."

"Can't I go and talk to it?"

"_What!_ To our Council? No; that is, not as a body. But if you can
run across a Councilman out of City Hall you can say what you wish. A
Councilman is just an ordinary man, you know."

But a Councilman out of City Hall was a hard man to find; and a child
couldn't go to a man's mansion to "talk him around." But, by grand luck
in a month or so, Marian did find, and _win_, all but Simpkins.

On Council night, Simpkins took up a good,--or I should say, bad--half
hour against Branton Hills "buying any old dump or scrap land that
is put up. What was this city coming to?" and so on, and so on. And
Marian's back yard wasn't bought. Now Youth is all right if you rub its
fur in a way which suits it; but, man!! hold on to your hat, if you
don't!! And Marian's fur was all lumpy. _Boy! was that kid MAD!!_

Now, just by luck, March thirty-first, coming along as days do, you
know, found Marian in front of a toy shop window, in which, way down
front, was a box of cigars, with a card saying: "This Brand Will Start
His Blood Tingling." And Marian, as boys say, was "on" in an instant;
and bought a cigar. Not a box, not a bunch, but just _a_ cigar. Coming
out Marian saw His Honor and Simpkins passing; Simpkins saying:--

"All right. I'll drop around, tonight." And was Marian happy? Wait a
bit.

That night as Gadsby and Simpkins sat talking in His Honor's parlor,
who would, "just by luck," (??) walk in, but Marian; saying, oh, _so_
shyly:--

"Just thought I'd drop in to chat with Nancy," and, on passing a couch,
slyly laid that cigar on it. Now Simpkins, in addition to his famous
grouch, was a parsimonious old crab; who, though drawing good pay
as Councilman, couldn't pass up anything that cost nothing; and, in
gazing around, saw that cigar; and, with a big apologizing yawn, and
slinking onto that couch as a cat slinks up on a bird, and, oh, _so_
nonchalantly lighting a match, was soon puffing away and raving about
Branton Hills politics. Out in a back parlor sat Marian and Nancy on a
big divan, hugging tightly up, arm in arm, and almost suffocating from
holding back youthful anticipations, as Simpkins said:--

"... and that Hopkins back yard stunt! Ridiculous! Why, his kid was
out, trying to find all of our Council to talk it into buying. Bah! And
_did_ I block it? I'll say I did! You don't find kids today laughing at
Councilman Simpkins."

An actual _spasm_ of giggling in that back parlor had Gadsby looking
around, inquiringly.

"No, sir!" Simpkins said. "No kid can fool Coun----"

_BANG!!_

Gadsby, jumping up saw only a frazzly cigar stump in Old Bill's mouth,
as that palpitating individual was vigorously brushing off falling
sparks as His Honor's rugs got a rain of tobacco scraps! Gadsby was
"on" in an instant, noticing Marian and Nancy rolling and tumbling
around on that big divan, and doubling up in a giggling fit, _way_ out
of control. Finally Simpkins angrily got up, viciously jamming on his
tall silk hat; and Marian, fighting that giggling fit, just _had_ to
call out:--

"_April Fool_, Councilman Simpkins!!"

(And Mayor Gadsby, on a following Council night, got Marian's land bill
through; many a Councilman holding his hand in front of his grinning
mouth, in voting for bright, vitalic Youth.)




XXVII


Widow Adams was sitting up again, for it was way past midnight,
and Virginia was out. Many months ago Virginia was also out, and
was brought back, unconscious. So now Nina was again sitting up,
for Virginia was not a night-owl sort of a girl. Finally, around
two o'clock, Nina couldn't stand it, and had to call in a passing
patrolman. Now this patrolman was an original Organization of Youth
boy, and had always known Nina and Virginia; and said:--

"Oh, now! I wouldn't worry so. Possibly a bus had a blowout; or--"

"But Virginia said nothing _about_ going on a bus! Oh!! _How_ could
that child vanish so?"

Naturally, all that that patrolman could do was to call his station;
and Nina, almost all in, lay down, until, just about dawn a jangling
ringing brought this half wild woman to a front hall, shouting:--

"This is Nina Adams talking! Who? _What?_ Virginia, is that you? What's
wrong? What! You and Harold Thompson? Our aviator? You did what? Took
his aircraft to _what_ city? Why, that's so far you can't----" but
Virginia had hung up. So Nina also hung up, and sat down with a big,
long sigh:--

"My Virginia, not _running_ away, but _flying_ away, to marry! Oh, this
Youth of today!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Around six o'clock that night, Virginia and Harold stood arm in arm in
Nina's parlor, as a big bus was groaning noisily away.

"But, Mama," said Virginia, sobbing pitifully, "I didn't think you
would----"

"That's just it, Virginia, you _didn't_ think!! But you _should!_ How
could I know what was going on? That's just you young folks of today.
You think of nothing but your own silly, foolish doings, and you allow
us old _good-for-nothings_ to go crazy with worry!!" and Nina sank in a
gasping swoon onto a sofa.

But old Doc Wilkins, arriving at Virginia's frantic call, knowing
Nina's iron constitution from childhood, soon had that limp form back
to normal; and, with a dark, disapproving scowl at Virginia, said:--

"Bring in a good batch of hot food, and your Ma will turn out all
right," and going out, with a snort of disgust, and banging viciously
that big front door!




XXVIII


Awful tidings in our Branton Hills' "Post," had so wrought up our
ordinarily happy, laughing Sarah, who, with Paul abroad, was back,
living again with old Tom Young, that Sarah, sitting on a low stool
by old Tom's rocking chair was so still that Tom put down his "Post,"
saying:--

"Gift of gab all run out, kid?"

But Sarah had an odd, thoughtful look. Sarah's bosom was rising and
falling abnormally; but, finally, looking quickly up at old Tom, Sarah
said:--

"Daddy, I want to go to war."

"_Do what?_" If Sarah had said anything about jumping out of a balloon,
or of buying a gorilla to play with, Tom Young wouldn't know any such
astounding doubt as brought his rocking chair to a quick standstill.

"_War?_ What kind of talk is this? A girl going to war? What for? How?
_Say!!_ Who _put_ this crazy stunt into your brain, anyway?"

As you know, Sarah was not only charming in ways, but also in build;
and, with that glorious crown of brownish-gold hair, that always
smiling mouth and that soft, plump girlishly-girlish form, no man, Tom
Young nor anybody, could think of Sarah and war in a solitary thought.
So Sarah said, softly:--

"Last night, our Night School trio thought that our boys, so far away,
must miss us, and Branton Hills sights; and Doris said, 'Branton Hills
sounds.' And so, why couldn't our trio join that big group of musicians
which is sailing soon? And, Daddy, you know Paul is in that army. I
don't know that I could find him, but--but--but I want to try. And
Kathlyn is talking of going as biologist with a big hospital unit; so
possibly I could stay with it."

Tom Young was _dumb!_ His "Post" actually _had_ told of such a musical
outfit about to sail; but it was a man's organization. So, now it has
got around to _this!_ Our girls, our dainty, loving girls, brimful of
both sympathy and patriotism, wanting to go into that tough, laborious
work of singing in army camps; in huts; in hospitals; singing from
trucks rolling along country roads along which sat platoons and
battalions of troops, waiting for word which might bring to this or
that boy his last long gun-toting tramp. Singing in--

"Aw, darling! Your trio was fooling, wasn't it? Now, girls don't----"

"Daddy, girls _do!_ So, if our folks don't put up too much of a--"

"_Aha!!_ _Now_ you said a mouthful; _if_ your folks _don't!_ Darling,
I'll say just two words as my part in this crazy stunt: '_Nothing
doing!!_' Kathlyn's work is mighty important; singing isn't."

Sarah had not grown up from infancy in kindly Tom's cabin without
knowing that his "no" was a "_no!!_" and not a flimsy, hollow word
which a whining, or a sniffling, or a bawling child could switch around
into: "Oh, all right, if you want to." So Sarah still sat on that low
stool; or, to turn it around almost backwards,--Sarah sat on that
stool,--still. _So_ still that Tom's old tin clock on its wall hooks
was soon dominating that small room with its rhythmic ticking, as a
conductor's baton controls a brass band's pianissimos. Finally Sarah
said softly, slowly, sadly and with a big, big sigh:--

"I _did_ so want to go." And that small clock was ticking, ticking,
ticking ...

For a full hour Sarah and old Tom sat talking and rocking, until Sarah,
phoning to Doris, said:--

"My Dad says no."

And Doris, phoning back to Sarah, said:--

"So did my Dad."

And, as Virginia Adams was that trio's third part; and as Sarah and
Doris had always known Nina Adams' strong will; and as,--Oh, hum! It
was a happy fascination until adult minds got hold of it!


XXIX


Gadsby was walking back from a visit down in Branton Hills'
manufacturing district on a Saturday night. A busy day's traffic had
had its noisy run; and with not many folks in sight, His Honor got
along without having to stop to grasp a hand, or talk; for a Mayor
out of City Hall is a shining mark for any politician. And so, coming
to Broadway, a booming bass drum and sounds of singing, told of a
small Salvation Army unit carrying on amidst Broadway's night shopping
crowds. Gadsby, walking toward that group, saw a young girl, back
towards him, just finishing a long, soulful oration, saying:--

"... and I can say this to you, for I know what I am talking about; for
I was brought up _in a pool of liquor!!_"

As that army group was starting to march on, with this girl turning
towards Gadsby, His Honor had to gasp, astonishingly:--

"Why! Mary Antor!!"

"Oh! If it isn't Mayor Gadsby! I don't run across you much, now-a-days.
How is Lady Gadsby holding up during this awful war?"

All such family gossip passing quickly, Gadsby said:--

"But this Salvation Army work, Mary? How long----"

Mary and His Honor had to walk along, as that big drum was now pounding
a block away. During that walk Gadsby found out all about that vast
void in Mary's bungalow following that fatal auto crash; and all about
"two old maid aunts" as Mary said, who had all that pantry's liquor
thrown down a drain and got out, also, a day or two following; all
about living now at Old Lady Flanagan's.

"... for I just _couldn't_ stay in that bungalow, with nobody around,
you know." And all about loving companionship in that grand old lady's
arms; and of Mary's finding that Flanagan, who got such a "wallop" from
Antor's killing, wasn't drinking so much, now; which put it into Mary's
mind that many a man would, with kindly coaching, turn from it.

"And I think that my nightly talks against liquor, hit; and hit _hard_,
too; for almost nightly a poor down-and-out will follow along with our
band, promising to cut it out and go straight. _Oh, why_ didn't I try
to stop Norman's drinking?"

"Probably," said Gadsby, "you did, in your girlish way; but you know
boys don't think that small girls know anything. I'd put up any amount
that Norman, in that far-away camp, is thinking of you, constantly."

"Oh-h-h-h! If I could only _know_ that!" and a look of almost sanctity,
and a big, long-drawn sigh told what a turmoil was going on in this
young girl's mind. "But I'm going on, and on and on with this night
talking until Norman is back again. Possibly a plan will turn up toward
both of us living down our past,----and our sorrow." And Gadsby, slowly
plodding along towards his dimly lit mansion, thought of a slight
transposition of that scriptural quotation: "And your sins, you adults,
shall fall upon your offspring, unto your third and fourth--"

"Oh, if a man would only think of his offspring having to carry on,
long past his last day! And of how hard it is for a boy or girl to
stand up and proudly (?) claim that so-and-so 'was my Dad,' if all
Branton Hills knows of that Dad's inglorious past. Poor kids!" for
you know that Gadsby said, in this story's start, that "a man should
so carry on his daily affairs as to bring no word of admonition from
anybody;" for a man's doings should put a stain upon no soul but his
own.

But, _aha!!_ As His Honor got to his parlor, his sad mind found a
happy, smiling Lady awaiting him; crying joyously:--

"Look! Look, John! Word from William! From Bill, in Paris!"

Bill's first communication said:--

"Darling Folks: Julius and I just got into this town from a month of
hard marching, ditch-digging and fighting. I am all right, and so is
Julius. Ran across Frank, who is on duty at our Commissary. Lucky guy!
Lots of food always around! Paul is growing fat. Looks mighty good. Oh,
how all of us do miss you and good old Branton Hills! I can't find a
solitary suit in this town that I would put on to go to a dog fight!
_Such fashion!_" and so on; just a natural outpouring from a boy, away
on his first trip from his Dad's kindly roof.

"Ha, ha!" said Gadsby, laughing jovially; "That's our Bill, all right!
Always thinking of dolling up!" and Lady Gadsby, rising quickly, said:--

"Oh, I must call up Nancy, Kathlyn and Sarah!" and, in a trio of small
bungalows, joy, _wild_ joy, found its way into girlish minds!

As Gadsby sat, going through this good word again and again, a mirthful
chuckling had Lady Gadsby asking:--

"What's so funny about it?"

"Nothing; only if I didn't know that Frank is such a grand, good
lad, I'd think Bill was hiding a bit from us; for that 'on duty at
Commissary' _might_ amount only to potato paring!"




XXX


Priscilla Standish was waiting at our big railroad station, on a warm
Spring day, for a train to pull out, so that cross-track traffic could
start again. It was just an ordinary train such as stop hourly at
Branton Hills, but Priscilla saw that a group was hurrying toward a
combination-car, way up forward. Now Priscilla was not a girl who found
morbid curiosity in any such a public spot; but, still, an odd, uncanny
sort of thrill,--almost a chill, in fact,--was urging, urging a slow
walk toward that car. Just why, Priscilla didn't know; but such things
do occur in a human mind. So Priscilla soon was standing on a trunk
truck, gazing down into that group which now was slowly moving back,
forming room for taking out a young man in khaki uniform, on a hospital
cot. With a gasp of horror, Priscilla was instantly down from that
truck, pushing through that group, and crying out, wildly:--

"_Arthur!_ Arthur Rankin! Oh! Oh! What is it, darling?" and looking up
at a hospital assistant, "Is it bad?"

"Don't know, right now, lady," said that snowy clad official.
"Unconscious. But our big hospital will do all it can for him."

Arthur Rankin! Arthur, with whom Priscilla had had many a childhood
spat! Arthur who had shown that "puppy stuff" for Priscilla, that his
old aunt was always so disapprovingly sniffing at! And now, unconscious
on a,----

With a murmuring of sympathy from that sorrowing public, now
dissolving, as all crowds do, Priscilla had a quick, comforting
thought: "Kathlyn is working at that hospital!"

Kathlyn had known Arthur as long as Priscilla had; and Kathlyn's famous
ability would----

So our panting and worrying girl was hurrying along through Broadway's
turning and inquiring crowds to that big hospital which our
Organization of Youth had had built. And now Arthur was going, for not
long, possibly, but, still possibly for----

       *       *       *       *       *

It was midnight in that big still building. Old Doctor Wilkins stood by
Arthur's cot; Priscilla, sobbing pitifully, was waiting in a corridor,
with Lady Standish giving what comfort a woman could. Lady Standish,
who took in dogs, cats, rabbits or any living thing that was hurt, sick
or lost; Lady Standish, donor of four thousand dollars for our big
Zoo; Lady Standish, kindly savior of Clancy's and Dowd's "Big Four,"
now waiting, without ability to aid a _human_ animal. Finally, Doctor
Wilkins, coming out, said:--

"Kathlyn says no sign of blood contamination, but vitality low; _badly_
low; sinking, I think. Railroad trip almost too much for him. Looks
bad."

But, at this instant, an assistant, calling Wilkins, said Arthur was
coming out of his coma; and was murmuring "about a woman known as
Priscilla. Do you know anybody by----?"

With a racking sob, Priscilla shot through that door, Lady Standish
quickly following. Arthur, picking up, a bit, from Priscilla's soft,
oh, _so_ soft and loving crooning and patting, took that fond hand
and--sank back! Doctor Wilkins, looking knowingly at Priscilla, said:--

"If it is as I think, you two had had thoughts of--"

A vigorous nod from Priscilla, and an approving look from Lady
Standish, and Doctor Wilkins said:--

"Hm-m-m! It should occur _right now!_ Or,----"

As quick as a flash that snowy-clad assistant was phoning; and,
_astonishingly_ soon, our good Pastor Brown stood by that cot; and,
with Arthur in a most surprising pick-up, holding Priscilla's hot,
shaking hand, through that still hospital room was wafting Priscilla's
soft, low words:--

"... you for my lawful husband, until ..."

       *       *       *       *       *

Doctor Wilkins, going out with Priscilla, now trying, oh, _so_ hard for
control; with grand, charming, loving Kathlyn, arm in arm, said:--

"That joy will pull him through. Boys, at war, so far away, will
naturally droop, both in body and mind, from lack of a particular
girl's snuggling and cuddling. So just wait until Kathlyn finds out
all about his condition; and good food, with this happy culmination of
a childhood infatuation, will put him in first-class condition, if no
complications show up."

Ah! What an important part of a city's institutions a hospital is!
What a comfort to all, to know that, should injury or any ailing
condition of man, woman or child occur without warning, anybody can,
simply through phoning find quick transportation at his door; and, with
angrily clanging gongs, or high-pitch whistlings obtaining a "right of
way" through all traffic, that institution's doors will swing apart,
assistants will quickly surround that cot, and an ability for doing
anything that Man _can_ do is at hand. You know, almost daily, of
capitalists of philanthropic mold, donating vast sums to a town or
an association; but, in your historian's mind, no donation can do so
much good as that which builds, or maintains hospitalization for all.
A library, a school, a boys' or girls' club, a vacation facility, a
"chair" of this or that in an institution of instruction,--all do much
to build up a community. Both doctoring as a study for a young man, and
nursing for a girl form most important parts of Mankind's activity.

And so, just four months from that awful, but also happy day, Arthur
Rankin sat in a hammock with Priscilla, on Lady Standish's porch, with
four small Rankins playing around; or was walking around that back yard
full of cats, dogs, rabbits, and so on, with no thought of soap box
orations in his mind.




XXXI


On a grand autumn morning Branton Hills' "Post" boys ran shouting down
Broadway, showing in half-foot wording: "FIGHTING STOPS!! HISTORY'S
MOST DISASTROUS WAR IS HISTORY NOW!!!" and again, Branton Hills stood
stock still. But only for an instant; for soon, it was, in all minds:--

"Thank God!! Oh, _ring_ your loud church clarions! _Blow_ your factory
blasts! Shout! Cry! Sing! _Play_, you bands! Burst your drums! Crack
your cymbals!"

Ah, what a sight on Broadway! Shop girls pouring out! Shop janitors
boarding up big glass windows against a surging mob! And, (sh-h-h-h)
many a church having in its still sanctity a woman or girl at its altar
rail.

Months, months, months! Branton Hills was again at its big railroad
station, its Municipal Band playing our grand National air, as a long
troop train, a solid mass of bunting, was snorting noisily in. And,
amidst that outpouring flood of Branton Hills boys, Lady Gadsby, Nancy,
Kathlyn and His Honor found Bill, Julius, Frank and John. Sarah was
just "going all apart" in Paul's arms, with Virginia swooning in
Harold's.

On old Lady Flanagan's porch sat Mary Antor; for, having had no word
from Norman for months, this grand young Salvation Army lass was in
sad, sad doubt. But soon, as that shouting mob was drifting away, and
happy family groups walking citywards, a khaki-clad lad, hurrying to
old Lady Flanagan's cabin, and jumping that low, ivy-clad wall, had
Mary, sobbing and laughing, in his arms. No. It wasn't Norman.




XXXII


A crowd was standing around in City Park, for a baby was missing.
Patrol cars roaring around Branton Hills; many a woman hunting around
through sympathy; kidnapping rumors flying around. His Honor was out
of town; but on landing at our railroad station, and finding patrol
cars drawn up at City Park, saw, in that crowd's midst, a tiny girl, of
about six, with a bunch of big shouting patrol cops, asking:--

"Who took that baby?"

"Did you do it?"

"Which way did it go?"

"How long ago did you miss it?"

"Say, kiddo!! _Why don't you talk?_"

An adult brain can stand a lot of such shouting, but a baby's is not in
that class; so, totally dumb, and shaking with fright, this tot stood,
thumb in mouth, and two big brown baby orbs just starting to grow
moist, as His Honor, pushing in, said:

"Wait a bit!!" and that bunch in uniform, knowing him, got up and
Gadsby sat down on a rock, saying:--

"You can't find out a _thing_ from a young child by such hard, gruff
ways. This tiny lady is almost in a slump. Now, just start this crowd
moving. I know a bit about Youth."

"That's right," said a big, husky patrolman. "If anybody living knows
kids, it's you, sir."

So, as things got around to normal, His Honor, now sitting flat on City
Park's smooth lawn, said, jovially:--

"Hulloa."

A big gulping sob in a tiny bosom--didn't gulp; and a grin ran around a
small mouth, as our young lady said:--

"_So_ many big cops! O-o-o! I got afraid!"

"I know, darling; but no big cops will shout at you now. _I_ don't
shout at tiny girls, do I?"

"No, sir; but if folks do shout, I go all woozy."

"Woozy? Woozy? Ha, ha! I'll look that up in a big book. But what's all
this fuss about? Is it about a baby?"

A vigorous nodding of a bunch of brown curls.

"What? Fussing about a baby? A baby is too small to fuss about."

"O-o-o-o! It _isn't!!_"

"No?"

"No, sir. I fuss about my dolly, an' it's not half so big as a baby."

"That's so. Girls do fuss about dolls. My girls did."

"How many dolls has your girls got?"

"Ha, ha! Not any, now. My girls all got grown up and big."

During this calm, happy talk, a patrolman, coming up, said:--

"Shall I stick around, Your Honor? Any kidnapping facts?"

"I don't know, just now. Wait around about an hour, and drop in again."

So His Honor, Mayor of Branton Hills, and Childhood sat on that grassy
lawn; a tiny tot making daisy chains, grass rings, and thrilling at
Gadsby's story of how a boy, known as Jack, had to climb a big, big
tall stalk to kill an awfully ugly giant. Finally Gadsby said:--

"I thought you had a baby playing with you."

"I did."

"Huh, it isn't playing now. Did it fly away?"

"Oho! No! A baby can't fly!"

"No. That's right. But how _could_ a baby go away from you without your
knowing it?"

"It didn't. I did know it."

Now, many may think that His Honor would thrill at this information;
but Gadsby didn't. So, "playing around" for a bit, His Honor finally
said:--

"I wish _I_ had a baby to play with, right now!"

"You can."

"Can I? How?"

With a tiny hand on baby lips, our small lady said:--

"Go look in that lilac arbor; but _go soft!_ I think it's snoozing."

And Gadsby, going to that arbor, got a frightful shock; for it was
Lillian, Nancy's baby! Not having known of this "kidnapping" as his
family couldn't find him by phoning, it _was_ a shock; for His Honor
was thinking of that young woman collapsing. So, upon that patrolman
coming back, as told, Gadsby said:--

"Go and call up your station, _quickly!_ Say that I want your Captain
to notify my folks that Lillian is all right."

"Good gosh, Your Honor!! Is this tot your grandchild?"

"Grandchild or no grandchild, _you dash to that box!!_"

And so, again, John Gadsby, Champion of Youth, had shown officialdom
that a child's brain and that of an adult vary as do a gigantic oak and
its tiny acorn.




XXXIII


Most of Gadsby's old Organization of Youth was still in town, though,
as you know, grown up. So, on a Spring day, all of its forty boys and
as many girls got most mystifying cards, saying:--

"Kindly go to Lilac Hill on May sixth, at four o'clock. IMPORTANT!
IMPORTANT! IMPORTANT!!" That was all. Not a word to show its origin. No
handwriting. Just a small, plain card in ordinary printing.

Not only that old Organization, but His Honor, Lady Gadsby, Old Tom
Young, Tom Donaldson, Nina Adams, Lady Standish and Old Lady Flanagan
got that odd card.

"Arrah! Phwat's this, anny way?" sang out that good old lady. "Is it
court summons, a picnic, or a land auction? By gorry, it looks phony!"

Old Tom Young, in his rocking chair, said:

"A card to go to Lilac Hill. It says 'important.' Ah! This Youth of
today! I'll put up a dollar that I can sniff a rat in this. But _my_
girl is all right, so I'll go."

And so it was, all around town. Nobody could fathom it.

Lilac Hill was as charming a spot as any that our big City Park
could boast. Though known as a hill, it was but a slight knoll with
surroundings of lilac shrubs, which, in May would always show a riot
of bloom; this knoll sloping down to a pond, with islands, boats and
aquatic plants. Lilac Hill had known many a picnic and similar outings;
for Branton Hills folks, living for six days amidst bricks and asphalt,
just _had_ to go out on Sundays to this dainty knoll, living for an
hour or so amongst its birds, blossoms and calm surroundings. City
traffic was far away, only a faint rumbling coming to this natural
sanctuary; and many a mind, and many a worn body had found a balm in
its charms.

But that mystifying card! From whom was it? What was it? _Why_ was
it? "Oh, hum! Why rack brains by digging into it?" was Branton
Hills' popular thought. "But,--go and find out!" That, also, was our
Organization's thought as May sixth was approaching.

"My gracious!" said Nancy. "It sounds actually spooky!"

But calm, practical Kathlyn said:--

"Spooks don't hop around in daylight."

May sixth had just that warm and balmy air that allows girls to put
on flimsy, dainty things, and youths to don sports outfits; and His
Honor, as that mystifying day was not far off, said:--

"This, I think, is a trick by a kid or two, to show us old ducks that
an 'incog' can hold out, right up to its actual consummation. I don't
know a thing about what's going on; but, by golly! I'll show up; and if
any fun is afloat, I'll join in, full blast."

But!!---- As our Organization boys and girls, and Branton Hills folks
got to Lilac Hill, _not a thing was found_ giving any indication that
anything out of ordinary was to occur! Just that calm, charming knoll,
with its lilacs, oaks, and happy vista out across Branton Hills' hill
districts! What _is_ this, anyway? A hoax? But all sat down, talking in
a big group, until, at just four o'clock,--_look!_ A stir, out back of
that island boat landing! What? On that _pond_? This card said Lilac
_Hill!_ But I said that a stir was occurring in back of that boat
landing, with its small shack for storing oars and such. If our big
crowd was laughing and talking up to now, it _quit!_ And quit mighty
quickly, too! If you want to hold a crowd, just mystify it. Old Lady
Flanagan was starting to shout about "this phony stuff," but Old Man
Flanagan said:--

"Shut up! You ain't part of this show!"

Nancy was actually hopping up and down, but Kathlyn stood calmly
watching; for this studious girl, way up in an "ology" or two, knows
that, by slow, thoughtful watching, you can gain much, as against
working up a wild, panicky condition. Lady Gadsby said again and again:
"What _is_ going on?" but Nina Adams said: "You ought to know that
today, anything can----"

But _look again!!_ From in back of that boat landing, a big fairy float
is coming! Slowly,--slowly--slowly; a cabin amidships, just _dripping_
with lilacs, as still and noncommittal as old Gibraltar. Slowly, on and
on it is coming; finally stopping right at that spot upon which our
group is standing; forty boys, forty girls, and a big mob, all as still
as a church. What _is_ it, anyway? Is anybody in it? Not a sign of it.
But wait! Aha! It _has_ an occupant, for, coming out of that lilac
glory is----_Parson Brown!!_ Parson Brown? _What_ was Parson Brown in
that cabin for? Aha!! A lilac spray is moving; and, as our groups stand
stock still, _look!_ Lucy Donaldson is coming out! Oh! _What_ a vision
of girlish joy and glory!! And--and--and, ah! That lilac spray is
moving again! Hulloa! Bill Gadsby is coming out!!

A Spring sun was slowly approaching its horizonward droop, shooting
rays of gold down onto our gasping crowd, as Parson Brown said:--

"William Gadsby, do you...?"

William, but shortly back from abroad, you know, standing with grand,
military rigidity, said:

"I do."

"And Lucy Donaldson, do you...?"

It didn't last long. Just a word or two; a burst of music of a famous
march by John Smith, Branton Hills' organist, in that cabin with a
small piano; just a---- But that crowd couldn't wait for that! With a
whoop His Honor sprang into that pond, wading swiftly to board that
fairy craft; and in an instant Nancy was following him, splashing
frantically along, and scrambling aboard to almost floor Bill with a
gigantic hug as His Honor shook Bill's hand, with a loving arm about
Lucy. Old Lady Flanagan was shouting wildly:--

"Whoops! Whoops! By gorra! This young gang of today is a smart boonch!"
and His Honor said:--

"Ha, ha! I didn't know a thing about this! Bill's a smart chap!" And
Old Tom Donaldson, grabbing happy, laughing, blushing, palpitating Lucy
as soon as that young lady was on dry land, said:--

"Say! You sly young chick! Why didn't you notify your old Dad?"

"Why, Daddy! That would spoil all my fun!"




XXXIV


Gadsby, Clancy and Dowd "just had" to, according to unanimous opinion,
go out to Lady Standish's suburban plot of ground to visit "Big Four;"
Gadsby, owing to an inborn liking for all animals; Clancy and Dowd from
fond association with this particular group. It was a glorious spot;
high, rolling land, with a patch of cool, shady woods, and a grand
vista across hill and plain, with shining ponds and rich farm lands.
And did "Big Four" _know_ Clancy and Dowd? I'll say so! And soon,
with much happy whinnying and "acting up," with two big roans poking
inquiring snouts in Clancy's hands, and two big blacks snuggling Gadsby
and Dowd, as happy a group of Man and animals as you could wish for,
was soon accompanying Lady Standish around that vast patch.

Anything that such animals could want was at hand. A bright, sparkling
brook was gabbling and gurgling through a stony gully, or dropping,
with many brilliant rainbows, down a tiny fall.

"Sally," said Gadsby, "you do a grand work in maintaining this spot.
If Mankind, as a body, would only think as you do, that an animal has
a brain, and knows good living conditions, you wouldn't find so many
poor, scraggly old Dobbins plodding around our towns, dragging a cart
far too big; and with a man totally without sympathy on it."

And Lady Standish said:--

"I just _can't_ think of anybody abusing an animal; nor of allowing it
to stay around, sick, hurt or hungry. I think that an animal is but a
point short of human; and, having a skin varying but slightly from our
own, will know as much pain from a whipping as would a human child. A
blow upon _any_ animal, if I am within sight, is almost as a blow upon
my own body. You would think that, with that vast gap which Mankind is
continually placing back of him in his onward march in improving this
big world, Man would think, a bit, of his pals of hoof, horn and claw.
But I am glad to say that, in this country, laws in many a community
admit that an animal has rights. Oh, how an animal that is hurt looks
up at you, John! An animal's actions can inform you if it is in pain.
It don't hop and jump around as usual. No. You find a sad, crouching,
cringing, small bunch of fur or hair, whining, and plainly asking you
to aid it. It isn't hard to find out what is wrong, John; any man
or woman who would pass by such a sight, just isn't worth knowing.
I just can't withstand it! Why, I think that not only animals, but
plants can know pain. I carry a drink to many a poor, thirsty growing
thing; or, if it is torn up I put it kindly back, and fix its soil up
as comfortably as I can. _Anything_ that is living, John, is worthy of
Man's aid."




XXXV


Poor old Bill Simpkins! Nothing in this world was worth anything;
nobody was right; all wrong, all wrong! Simpkins had no kin; and, not
marrying, was "just plodding along," living in a small room, with no
fun, no constant company, no social goal to which to look forward; and
had, thus, grown into what boys call "a big, old grouch." But it wasn't
all Simpkins' fault. A human mind was built for contact with similar
minds. It should,--in fact,--it _must_ think about what is going on
around it; for, if it is shut up in a thick, dark, bony box of a skull,
it will always stay in that condition known as "status quo;" and grow
up, antagonistic to all surroundings. But Simpkins didn't _want_ to
growl and grunt. It was practically as annoying to him as to folks
around him. But, as soon as that shut-up, solitary mind found anybody
wanting it to do anything in confirmation of public opinion,--no! that
mind would contract, as a snail in its spiral armor--and balk.

Lady Gadsby and His Honor, in talking about this, had thought of
improving such a condition; but Simpkins was not a man to whom you
could broach such a thought. It would only bring forth an outburst
of sarcasm about "trying it on your own brain, first." So Branton
Hills' Council always had so to word a "motion" as to, in a way, blind
Simpkins as to its import. Many such a motion had a hard fight showing
him its valuation as a municipal law; such as our big Hall of Natural
History, our Zoo, and so on.

Now nothing can so light up such a mind as a good laugh. Start a man
laughing, good, long and loud, and his mind's grimy windows will slowly
inch upward; snappy, invigorating air will rush in, and--lo! that old
snarling, ugly grouch will vanish as hoar-frost in a warm Spring thaw!

And so it got around, on a bright Spring day, to Old Bill sitting on
Gadsby's front porch; outwardly calm, and smoking a good cigar (which
didn't blow up!), but, inwardly just full of snarls and growls about
Branton Hills' Youth.

"Silly half-grown young animals, found out that two plus two is four,
and thinking that _all_ things will fit, just that way!"

Now that small girl, "of about six," who had had Nancy's baby out in
City Park, was passing Gadsby's mansion, and saw Old Bill. A kid of
six has, as you probably know, no formally laid-out plan for its daily
activity; anything bobbing up will attract. So, with this childish
instability of thought, this tiny miss ran up onto Gadsby's porch and
stood in front of Old Bill, looking up at him, but saying not a word.

"Huh!" Bill just _had_ to snort. "Looking at anything?"

"No, sir."

"_What!!_ Oh, that is, you think 'not much,' probably. What do you
want, anyway?"

"I want to play."

"All right; run along and play."

"No; I want to play with _you_."

"_Pooh!!_ That's silly. I'm an old man. An old man can't play."

"Can, too. My Grandpa can."

"But I'm not your Grandpa, thank my lucky stars. Run along now; I'm
thinking."

"So am I."

"You? Huh! A kid can't think."

"Ooo-o! _I_ can!"

"About what?"

"About playing with you."

Now Simpkins saw that this was a condition which wouldn't pass with
scowling or growling, but didn't know what to do about it. Play with a
kid? _What?_ Councilman Simpkins pl----

But into that shut-up mind, through a partially,--_only_
partially,--rising window, was wafting a back thought of May Day in
City Park; and that happy, singing, marching ring of tots around that
ribbon-wound mast. Councilman Simpkins was in that ring.

So this thought got to tramping round and round many a musty corridor
in his mind; throwing up a window, "busting in" a door, and shoving a
lot of dust and rubbish down a back stairway. Round and round it ran,
until, (!!) Old Bill, slowly and surprisingly softly, said:--

"What do you want to play?"

Oh! Oh! what a victory for that tot!! What a victory for _Youth!!_ And
what a _fall_ for grouchy, snarling Maturity!! I think that Simpkins,
right at that instant, _saw_ that bright sunlight coming in through
that rising window; rising by baby hands; and from that "bust in" door.
I think that Old Bill cast off, in that instant, that hard, gloomy
coating of dissatisfaction which was gripping his shut-up mind. And I
think,--in fact, I _know_,--that Old Bill Simpkins was now,--that is,
was--was--was, oh, just plain _happy!_

"What do you want to play?"

"This is a lady, a-going to town."

"Play _what_?"

"My!! Don't you know how to play that? All right; I'll show you. Now
just stick out your foot. That's it. Now I'll sit on it, so. Now you
bump it up and down. Ha, ha! Ho, ho! That's it! This is a lady, a-going
to town, a-going to town, a-going to town!" and as that tiny lady sang
that baby song gaily and happily, Old Bill was actually laughing; and
laughing _uproariously_, too!

As this sight was occurring, His Honor and Lady Gadsby, looking out
from a parlor window, Gadsby said, happily:--

"A lady physician is working on Old Bill," causing Lady Gadsby to add:--

"And a mighty good doctor, too."




XXXVI


It was night again. That small Salvation Army group was parading and
singing. A young girl would soon start a long oration against drink.
Now boys, gawking as boys always do, saw a shadowy form of a man
slinking along from doorway to doorway, plainly watching this marching
group, but also, plainly trying to stay out of sight. A halt, a song
or two, and Mary Antor was soon walking towards Old Lady Flanagan's
cabin. But!! In passing big, dark City Park, a man, rushing wildly
up, wrapping that frail form in a cast-iron grip, planting kiss upon
kiss upon Mary's lips, finally unwound that grip and stood stiffly in
military saluting position. Mary, naturally in a bad fright, took a
short, anxious, inquiring look, and instantly, all that part of City
Park actually _rang_ with a wild girlish cry:--

"_Norman!!!_"

"Hulloa, kiddo! Just got in, half an hour ago, on a small troop train;
and, by luck, saw you marching in that group. _Wow!!_ But you do look
_grand!_"

"And you look grand, too, Norman; but--but--but--not drunk?"

"No, sis! Not for many a day now. Saw too much of it in camp. Big,
grand, corking good chaps down and out from it. Days and days in jail,
military jail, you know, and finally finding a 'bad conduct' stamp on
Company books. No, sir; I'm off it, _for good!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

On old Lady Flanagan's porch Mary sat way past midnight with, no,
not with Norman, only, but with _two_ khaki-clad boys; and it was
miraculous that that small, loving childish bosom could hold so much
joy! Old Lady Flanagan in nightgown and cap, looking down a front
stairway, (and Old Man Flanagan, also in nightgown and cap, and also
looking down), said:--

"Arrah!! Go _wan_ oop stairs, you snoopin' varmit!"

"_Who's_ a snoopin' varmint? Not _you_, of----"

"Go wan oop, I say! By golly! That darlin' girl has found a mountain of
gold wid Norman an'----"

"Who's that wid Norman? That guy's around, nights, now, as--"

"Say, you!! Do you go oop? Or do I swat you?"




XXXVII


Bill Gadsby, going abroad, naturally wasn't on that ballot for
Councilman Antor's chair; but this history shows that that mouthy
antagonist who had had so much to say about "pink satin ribbons" and
"vanilla sprays," didn't win. No. A first class man got that position;
old Tom Young, Sarah's Dad, as good an old soul as any in all Branton
Hills. And was Sarah happy! Oh, my! And was Sarah proud! Two "oh, mys!"
Tiny Nancy, loyal as always to Bill, said:--

"Bill was as good as in, for nobody, knowing my Bill would ballot
against him; and Bill would hold that honor now, but for 'Old Glory's'
calling."

That's right, Nancy darling, you stick up for Bill; for, though
Bill didn't know it until many months, a citation "for outstanding
and valorous conduct in action" was soon to go through our National
Printing Plant! For a "city fop" or an "outdoor part of a tailor shop"
is not always a boob, you know.

Gadsby's mansion was again brightly aglow that night, that "World War
flag" not hanging in his window now. And so, on Labor Day night, Lady
Gadsby and His Honor, sitting in his parlor, thought that a light
footfall was sounding out on his porch. As Gadsby got up to find
out about it, Julius, coming in with a young girl, stood looking,
grinningly, at Lady Gadsby; who, jumping up, said, happily:--

"Why! Mary Antor!!"

"No, Ma," said Julius. "This is not Mary Antor."

"Not Mary Antor? Why, Julius, I think I know M----"

"Not Mary Antor, Ma, but Mary Gadsby!"

"Oh! Oh! My _darling_ girl!!" and half crying and half laughing, Mary
was snuggling in Lady Gadsby's arms; and His Honor, coming in, saying:--

"By golly! That young cuss, Cupid, is mighty busy around this town!
Why, I can hardly walk two blocks along Broadway, without a young girl,
who has 'grown up in a night,' stopping, and saying: 'Mayor Gadsby,
this is my husband.' But I'll say that Cupid's markmanship has always
brought about happy matings. And, Mary, you darling kid, your sad, dark
shadows will gradually pass; and Lady Gadsby and I will try to bring
you loads and loads of comfort. But, say, you, Julius! I didn't know
that you and Mary----"

"Ho, ho" said Mary, laughing. "Didn't you know that Julius and Norman
and I sat out nights on old Lady Flanagan's porch?"

"Why, no; how should I? I don't go snooping around anybody's porch."

"Ha, ha, Dad," said Julius; "no snooping would find _that_ out. Mary
and I had had this plan so long ago that I didn't know a World War was
coming!"




XXXVIII


As a small boy, your historian was told that "A king was in his
counting room, a-counting out his cash," or similar words, which told,
practically, of his taking account of stock. So, also, Gadsby was on
his thinking-porch, a-thinking of his past. (A mighty good thing to do,
too; if anybody should ask you!)

"If," said His Honor, "you can't find any fun during childhood, you
naturally won't look for it as you grow up to maturity. You will grow
'hard,' and look upon fun as foolish. Also, if you don't furnish fun
for a child, don't look for it to grow up bright, happy and loving. So,
always put in a child's path an opportunity to watch, talk about, and
know, as many good things as you can."

Lady Gadsby, from a parlor window, said:

"Practicing for a stumping tour, or a political pow-wow?"

"Ha, ha! No. Just thinking out loud."

So, as thinking cannot hurt anybody, His Honor was soon going on:--

"Affairs which look small or absurd to a full-grown man may loom up as
big as a mountain to a child; and you shouldn't allow a fact that you
saw a thing 'so much that I am sick of it,' to turn you away from an
inquiring child. _You_ wasn't sick of it, on that far-past day on which
you first saw it. I always look back, happily and proudly, to taking
a small girl to our City Florist's big glass building; to a group at
our Night Court; a group finding out about dispatching our mail; and
our circus! Boy! That _was_ fun! Our awarding diplomas at City Hall;
tiny Marian at our airport's inauguration; our Manual Training School
graduation. _All_ that did a big lot toward showing Youth that this
big world is 'not half bad,' if adults will but watch, aid, and coach.
And I _will not_ stand anybody's snapping at a child! Particularly a
tiny tot. If you think that you _must_ snap, snap at a child so big as
to snap back. I don't sanction 'talking back' to adults, but, ha, ha!
I _did_ find a grand, big _wallop_ in Marian's April Fool cigar! Woo!
_Did_ Old Bill jump!! But that did no harm, and a sad young mind found
a way to 'match things up' with an antagonist. Now, just stand a child
up against your body. How tall is it? Possibly only up to your hip.
Still, a man,--or an animal _thinking_ that it is a man--will slap,
whip, or viciously _yank_ an arm of so frail, so soft a tiny body!
_That_ is what _I_ call a _coward!!_ By golly! almost a _criminal!_ If
a tot is what you call naughty, (and no child voluntarily is,) why not
lift that young body up onto your lap, and talk--_don't shout_--about
what it just did? Shouting gains nothing with a tot. Man can shout at
Man, at dogs, and at farm animals; but a man who shouts at a child is,
at that instant, _sinking in his own muck of bullyism_; and bullyism
is a sin, if anything in this world is. Ah! _Youth!_ You glorious
dawn of Mankind! You bright, happy, glowing morning Sun; not at full
brilliancy of noon, I know, but unavoidably on your way! _Youth!_ How
I do thrill at taking your warm, soft hand; walking with you; talking
with you; but, most important of all, _laughing_ with you! _That_ is
Man's pathway to glory. A man who drops blossoms in passing, will carry
joy to folks along his way; a man who drops crumbs will also do a
kindly act; but a man who drops kind words to a sobbing child will find
his joy continuing for many a day; for blossoms will dry up; crumbs
may blow away; but a kind word to a child may start a blossom growing
in that young mind, which will so far surpass what an _un_kindly man
might drop, as an orchid will surpass a wisp of grass. Just stop a bit
and look back at your footprints along your past pathway. Did you put
many humps in that soil which a small child might trip on? Did you
angrily slam a door, which might so jolt a high-strung tot as to bring
on nights and nights of insomnia? Did you so constantly snarl at it
that it don't want you around? In fact, did you put _anything_ in that
back-path of yours which could bring sorrow to a child? Or start its
distrust of you, as its rightful _guardian_? If so, _go back_ right
now, man, and _fix_ up such spots by kindly acts from now on. Or, _jump
into a pond, and don't crawl out again!!_ For nobody wants you around!"

Lady Gadsby, as this oration was wafting off amongst lilac shrubs, and
across soft, warm lawns, had sat, also thinking; finally coming out
onto that ivy-bound porch, and sitting down by His Honor, saying:--

"That was just grand, John, but I was thinking along a path varying a
bit from that. You know that Man's brain is _actually_ all of him. All
parts of his body, as you follow down from his brain, act simply as
aids to it. His nostrils bring him air; his mouth is for masticating
his food; his hands and limbs furnish ability for manipulation and
locomotion; and his lungs, stomach and all inward organs function
_only_ for that brain. If you look at a crowd you say that you saw
lots of folks: but if you look at a man bathing in a pond; and if that
man sank until only that part from his brow upward was in sight, you
might say that you saw nobody; only a man's scalp. But you actually
saw a _man_, for a man is only as big as that part still in sight. Now
a child's skull, naturally, is not so big as a man's; so its brain has
no room for all that vast mass of thoughts which adult brains contain.
It is, so to say, in a small room. But, as days and months go by, that
room will push its walls outward, and that young brain gradually fill
up all that additional room. So, looking for calm, cool thinking in a
child is as silly as looking for big, juicy plums amongst frail spring
blossoms. Why, oh, _why_ don't folks think of that? _You_ know what
foolish sounding things Julius was always asking, as a child. 'How can
just rubbing a match light it?' 'Why is it dark at night?' 'Why can't
a baby talk?' But, you and I, John, didn't laugh at him. No, not for
an instant. And _now_ look at our Julius and our Kathlyn; both famous,
just through all that asking; and our aid. John, God _could_ put Man
into this world, full-grown. But God don't do so; for God knows that,
without a tiny hand to hold, a tiny foot to pat, tiny lips to kiss, and
a tiny, warm, wriggling body to hug, Man would know nothing but work."

Gadsby sat smoking for a bit, finally saying:--

"Darling, that pair of robins up in that big oak with four young, and
you and I in this big building, also with four, know all about what
you just said; and, and,--hmmm! It's almost midnight." And His Honor's
mansion was soon dark; bathing in soft moonlight.




XXXIX


Practically all Branton Hills was talking about Councilman Simpkins;
for Councilman Simpkins just didn't look natural; and Councilman
Simpkins didn't _act_ natural. In fact, Councilman Simpkins was
crawling out of his old cocoon; and, though an ugly, snarling _dowdy_
worm had lain for so long, shut up in that tight mass of wrappings
around his brain, _now_ a gay, smiling moth was coming out; for
Councilman Simpkins was "dolling up!"

If Bill Gadsby was known as a "tailor-shop's outdoor part," Old Bill
was not _a_ part. No, Old Bill _was_ that tailor shop--outdoor, indoor,
or without a door. In fact, Councilman Simpkins now had "_it_," such as
our films talk about so much today.

But Simpkins' outfit was not flashy or "loud." Suits of good cloth,
hats of stylish form, always a bright carnation "just south of his
chin," boots always glossy, and a smart, springy walk, had all Broadway
gasping as this Apollo-vision swung jauntily along. Nancy, happy,
giggling Nancy, was "all of a grin" about this magic transformation;
and, with that old, inborn instinct of womanhood, told Lucy:--

"You just watch, and mark my word. A woman is in this pudding! Old Bill
just couldn't boom out in such a way without having a goal in sight;
and I'll put up a dollar on it."

And Lucy, also a woman, said smilingly:--

"And I'll put up a dollar and a half!"

But His Honor and Lady Gadsby, at such talk would look skyward, cough,
and say:--

"Possibly a woman; and a mighty young woman, at that."

Now, if anything will "warm up" a public, it is gossip; particularly
if it is about mystifying actions of a public man; and this had soon
grown to a point at which a particularly curious man or woman thought
of going to Old Bill and boldly asking: "Who is it?" But, as I said,
what Councilman Simpkins would say to such "butting in" was known to
all Branton Hills. No. Councilman Simpkins could doll up and trot
around all that that portly Solon might wish; but, so to say, a sign
was always hanging from his coat front, saying:--

"HANDS OFF!!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Nina Adams and Virginia sat on Gadsby's porch with Nancy and Kathlyn;
and Old Bill was up as a topic. Virginia, constantly smiling and
inwardly chuckling, hadn't much to say about our frisky Councilman;
and Nancy and Kathlyn couldn't fathom why. But Nina, not so backward,
said:

"Pffft! If a man wants to throw old clothing away and buy stylish
outfits, what affair is it, but his own? It isn't right so to pick out
a man, and turn him into a laughing stock of a city. Old Bill isn't a
bad sort; possibly born grouchy; but if a grouchy man or woman, (and I
know a _bunch_ of that class in this town!) _can_ pull out of it, and
laugh, and find a bit of joy in living, _I_ think it is an occasion for
congratulations, _not_ booing."

"Oh," said Kathlyn, "I don't think anybody is booing Councilman
Simpkins. But you know that any showing of such an innovation is apt to
start gossip. Just why, I don't know. It, though, is a trait of Mankind
only. Animals don't 'bloom' out so abruptly. You can hunt through
Biology, Zoology or any similar study, and find but slow,--awfully
slow,--adaptations toward any form of variation. Hurrying was not known
until Man got around."

"My!" said Nancy, gasping, and not giggling now, "I wish that _I_ could
know all that you know, Kathy. As our slang puts it, 'I don't know
nothin'.'"

"But, you could," said Kathlyn, "if you would only study. All through
our young days, you know, with you and Bill out at a card or dancing
party, you in flimsy frills, and Bill swishing around in sartorial
glory, _I_ was upstairs, studying. And so was Julius."

"That's right," said Nina. "I wish Virginia would study."

"Oh, I _am!_" said Virginia, all aglow.

"You? Studying _what_?"

"Aviation! Harold is going to show--"

"Now, Virginia, Harold is _not!_" and Nina Adams' foot was _down!_
"It's not so bad for a man to fly, but a girl--"

"But, Mama, lots of girls fly, nowadays."

"I know that, _and_ I also know _a_ girl who _won't!_ and, just as Lucy
has always known that Old Tom Young's 'no' _was_ a no, just so had Nina
Adams brought up Virginia."

"But," said Kathlyn, "this sky-shooting talk isn't finding out anything
about Councilman Simpkins;" and Virginia said:--

"Possibly Old Bill wants to 'fly high.' I think I'll ask Harold about
taking him up for a jaunt."

This, bringing a happy laugh all around, Nina said:--

"Now don't jolly poor Bill too much. I don't know what, or who, got
him to 'going social.'" And Nancy, giggling, said:--

"I put up a dollar, with Lucy's dollar-fifty that it's a woman."

"Oh, I don't know, now," said Nina. "A man isn't always trotting around
on a woman's apron strings," and, as it was growing dark, Nina and
Virginia got up to go.

Passing down Gadsby's front walk, a soft night wind brought back to
that porch:--

"Now, Virginia, _quit_ this! You will stay _on solid ground!_"

"Aw, Ma! Harold says----"

But a big bus, roaring by, cut it short.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just a month from this, His Honor, sitting on his porch with his
"Morning Post" ran across a short bit, just two rows of print, which
had him calling "Hi!" which Lady Gadsby took as a signal for a quick
trip to that porch.

"All right, Your Honor! On duty! What's up?"

Gadsby, folding his "Post" into a narrow column, and handing it to that
waiting lady, said nothing. As that good woman saw that paragraph,
Gadsby saw first a gasp, following that, a grin, and finally:--

"_Why!_ Of all things! So _that's_ Nina--"

That row of print said, simply:--

"By Pastor Brown, on Saturday night, in Pastor's study, Nina Adams and
Councilman Simpkins."

"Why!" said Lady Gadsby, laughing, "Nina sat on this porch only last
month, talking about Old Bill, but saying nothing about this! I'm going
right around to hug that darling woman; for _that_ is what I call
_tact_."

So, as Nina and our Lady sat talking, Nina said:

"You know that Bill and I, growing up from kids in school, always got
along grandly; no childhood spats; but, still it was no 'crush' such
as Youth falls into. As Bill got out of high school, I still had two
rooms to go through. You also know that I wasn't a 'Miss' for long
from graduation day. But Irving Adams was lost in that awful 'Titanic'
calamity, and I brought up my baby in my widowhood. Bill was always
sympathizing and patronizing, though all Branton Hills thought him a
cast-iron grouch. But a public man is not always stiff and hard in his
off hours; and Bill and I, slowly but gradually finding many a happy
hour could--

"All right, you grand, luscious thing!!" and Lady Gadsby and Nina sat
laughing on a couch, as in old, old school days. "And," said Nina,
happily; "poor Bill's upstairs, now, putting his things around to suit
him. Living for so long in a small lodging all his things staid in a
trunk. A lodging-room always has various folks around, you know, and a
man don't lay his things out as in his _own_ room. So--"

"Nina," said Lady Gadsby; "do you know what brought him out of his old
shut-in way of looking at things?"

"From just a word or two Bill drops, occasionally, I think that a child
is--"

And Lady Gadsby, said; "You know our Good Book's saying about: 'And a
tiny child shall----'"




XL


Six months from that day upon which old Mars, God of War, had angrily
thrown down his cannons, tanks, gas-bombs and so on, fuming at Man's
inability to "stand up to it," Gadsby's mansion was dark again. Not
totally dark; just his parlor lamp, and a light or two in halls and
on stairways. And so this history found Nancy and Kathlyn out on that
moon-lit porch; Nancy sobbing, fighting it off, and sobbing again.
Tall, studious, loving Kathlyn, sitting fondly by Nancy's tiny form,
said;--

"Now, sis; I wouldn't cry so much, for I don't think that conditions,
just now, call for it."

"B-b-b-but I'd stop if I could, wouldn't I?" and poor Nancy was sobbing
again. "Now, _wait!_" and Kathlyn, uncommonly cross, vigorously shook
Nancy's arm. "You can't gain a _thing_ this way. Mama is probably all
right. Oh, is that you, Daddy?"

His Honor sat down by his two girls. Gadsby was not looking good. Black
rings around his always laughing orbs; a hard cast to that jovial
mouth; a gray hair or two, cropping up amongst his wavy brown. But
Gadsby was not old. Oh, no; far from it. Still, that stoop in walking;
that odd, limp slump in sitting; that toning down in joviality, had,
for six months past, had all Branton Hills sympathizing with its
popular Mayor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Days; days; days! And, oh! that _tough_ part,--nights, nights, nights!
Nights of two young chaps, in full clothing, only just napping on a
parlor couch. Nights of two girls nodding in chairs in a dimly,--oh,
_so_ dimly a lit room.

It got around almost to Christmas, only a fortnight to that happy day;
but,--happy in Gadsby's mansion? Finally Frank took a hand:--

"Now, kid, _do_ try to stop this crying! You know I'm not scolding you,
darling, but, you _just can't_ go on this way; and _that's that!_"

"I'm trying _so_ hard, hubby!"

Now Nancy was of that good, sturdy old Colonial stock of His Honor
and Lady Gadsby; and so, as Christmas was approaching, and many a
bunch of holly hung in Broadway's big windows, and as many a Salvation
Army Santa Claus stood at its curbs, Nancy's constitution won out;
but a badly worn young lady was in and out of Gadsby's mansion daily;
bringing baby Lillian to kiss Grandma, and riding back with Frank at
about six o'clock.

       *       *       *       *       *

Old Doctor Wilkins, coming in on a cool, sharp night, found His Honor,
Nancy, Kathlyn, Bill, Julius, Lucy, Mary, Frank and John all in that
big parlor.

"Now, you bunch, it's up to you. Lady Gadsby will pull through all
right," (Nancy rushing wildly to kiss him!) "it hangs now upon good
nursing; and I know you will furnish that. And I will say without
a wisp of a doubt, that a calm, happy room; not too many around;
and--and--hmmm!! Julius, can't you hunt around in our woods that you
and Kathlyn know so thoroughly, and find a tall, straight young fir;
cut it down, rig it up with lights and a lot of shiny stuff; stand it
up in your Ma's room, and----"

       *       *       *       *       *

    'Tis a night, almost Christmas,
    And all through that room
    A warm joy is stirring;
    No sign of a gloom.
    And "Ma," sitting up,
    In gay gown, and cap,
    No, no! Will _not_ start
    On a long wintry nap!
    For, out on that lawn
    A group of girls stand;
    A group singing carols
    With part of our Band.
    And that moon, in full vigor,
    Was lustrous; and lo!
    _Our Lady is singing!_
    Aha, _now_ I know
    That Nancy and Kathlyn
    And Julius and Bill
    And also His Honor,
    Will sing with a will!
    And Old Doctor Wilkins
    Amidst it all stands;
    Smiling and nodding,
    And rubbing his hands;
    And, sliding out, slyly;
    Calls back at that sight:--
    "Happy Christmas to all;
    And to all a Good Night!"

Along about midnight a happy group sat around Gadsby's parlor lamp, as
Dr. Wilkins was saying;--

"Stopping a war; that is, stopping actual military combat, is not
stopping a war in _all_ its factors. During continuous hard strain a
human mind can hold up; and it is truly amazing how much it can stand.
Day by day, with that war-strain of worry pulling it down, it staunchly
holds aloof, as a mighty oak in facing a storm. But it has a limit!!
With too much and too long strain, it will _snap_; just as that mighty
oak will fall, in a long fight. Lady Gadsby will avoid such a snap
though it is by a narrow margin."

As this group sat in that holly-hung parlor, with that big cloth sign
in big gold capitals; HAPPY CHRISTMAS, across its back wall; with horns
tooting outdoors; with many a window around town aglow with tiny,
dancing tallow-dip lights; with baby Lillian "all snuggling--so warm in
a cot; as vision of sugar plums"--(and why _shouldn't_ a baby think of
sugar plums on that night, almost Christmas?); as, I say, this happy
group sat around Gadsby's lamp, Mars, that grim old war tyrant, was
far, far away. Upstairs, calmly snoozing on a big downy pillow, Lady
Gadsby was now rapidly coming back again to that buxom, happy-go-lucky
First Lady of Branton Hills.




XLI


Christmas, gay and happy in Gadsby's mansion, was soon far, far back.
A robin or two was hopping about on His Honor's lawn, looking for a
squirming lunch; Lady was taking short walks with Nancy; Kathlyn having
to go back to work in our big hospital. Lilac, syringa, narcissus,
tulips, hyacinths burst out in a riot of bloom; and a bright warm Sun
brought joy to all. And so this history found His Honor on his porch
with his "Post" as a young lad, coming up, said;--"Good morning, sir.
I'm soliciting funds for a big stadium for Branton Hills, which will
furnish an opportunity for football, polo,----"

"Whoa!" said Gadsby, putting down his "Post" and looking critically at
his young visitor. "You look a bit familiar, boy. Oho! If it isn't kid
Banks; oh, pardon!--_Allan_ Banks; son of Councilman Banks! You young
folks grow up so fast I don't know half of you. Now what about this
soliciting. Who is back of you?"

"Branton Hills' Organization of Youth; Part Two, sir."

"Branton Hills Org----Ha, ha! Upon my word! Who is starting this
group?"

Mary, coming out from His Honor's parlor, said:--

"Oh, I forgot to notify you of this. Norman has got about fifty kids
from Grammar School boys and girls, anxious to follow in _your_
Organization's foot-prints."

Was Gadsby happy? Did Gadsby thrill? Did that long-past, happy day
float in glowing colors through his mind? It did. And now that old,
hard-working bunch of kids, grown up, now, and with kids of its own;
that loyal bunch of young sprouts was taking root; was born again!

Oh, _how_ Youth crawls up on you! How a tiny girl "almost instantly"
shoots up into a tall, charming young woman! _How_ a top-spinning,
ball-tossing, racing, shouting boy looms up into a manly young chap in
Military School uniform! Gadsby _was_ happy; for, wasn't this a tonic
for his spinal column? So His Honor said;--

"Allan, I think Branton Hills will officially aid this stadium plan.
I'll put it up to Council."

But, Allan Banks, _not_ Kid Banks now, was just so old as to know a
thing or two about Council bills; and, out as a solicitor, naturally
sought a good showing on donations won, so said;--

"A Council donation will fit in grand, sir; but how about grouchy old
Bill Simpk----"

"Trot along, Allan."

"But how about this stadium? I'm doubting Old B--"

"Trot along, Allan."

       *       *       *       *       *

What Mary had said was a fact. Norman Antor had not only fought a
military war; Norman Antor had also fought an _inward_ war. A war,
which fought him with gallon jugs, small phials, spoons, mixing
apparatus, and--a stumbling, mumbling _stupor!_ Norman had fought with
about two million lads in that military war; but now, with no aid but a
strain of good blood, starting way back of his carousing Dad (but, as
such traits may, skipping a notch or two, and implanting in this young
lad just a grain of its old nobility of mind), was fighting again; and,
just as any solitary young chap amongst that two million loyally did
his part, just so was this tiny grain now doing _its_ part; fighting
valiantly in his brain. It was giving him torturing thoughts in army
night-camps, of a darling, loving young girl, a part of his own family,
growing up "in a pool of liquor;" thoughts in night-camps of Branton
Hills' patrol-wagon trips to jail; and _Darn_ that thought of Virginia!
Virginia _drunk_ by his own hand! Ugh!! _Why not chop that stinking
hand off?_ And, on coming back to Branton Hills, watching that darling
Mary in Salvation Army uniform, tramping, talking, praying for just
such low-down "liquor hounds" as----.

Oh! It was an awful fight! A long, brain-racking onslaught against a
villain shut in by walls of iron! But though Norman Antor's night-camp
fights with Norman Antor had "put a big kick" in his wish to "lay off
that stuff," just a final blow, just an awful brain-crashing _blast_
was still missing, so that that big right hand might point skyward,
to clinch that vow. And that blast was waiting for Norman! To anybody
standing around, it wasn't much of a blast; but it _was!_ It was a
mighty concussion of T.N.T., coming as Mary, young, loving, praying
Mary, said, as his arms unwound from around that frail form:--

"Why, Norman! _Not drunk?_"

_God!!_ What flashing, shooting, sizzling sparks shot through his
brain!! Up, out, in; all kinds of ways!! _What_ crashing bombs!!

And, that first calm night on Old Lady Flanagan's porch; that moonlit
night of bliss, with soft, cuddling, snuggling, laughing, crying
darling Mary!

"I say," Norman was shouting, inwardly; "that night of bliss _was_ a
night of bliss and _don't anybody try to say that it wasn't!_"

For it was a night on which a young man's Soul was _back_; back in its
own Mind, now full of God's incomparably grand _purity!_

       *       *       *       *       *

Lady Gadsby was visiting Nina, sitting in that big front parlor;
Virginia sitting calmly rocking; (and, hmmm! That was about all
Virginia _ought_ to do, just now!) A young High School girl, coming in,
said;--

"Good morning! I'm soliciting for funds for a stadium for----"

"_Marian!_" sang out Virginia, "_What's_ all this? _You_, soliciting?"

"Why not?" said Marian, brightly. "Norman Antor's Organization of
Youth; Part Two, is soli--"

"Norman Antor's _what_?" and Virginia was all agog in an instant, as
Marian Hopkins told all about it; and, with childish flippancy, forgot
all about soliciting, saying:--

"I was told that Harold is giving flying instructions. Don't _you_ want
to fly? My! _I_ do!"

"I _did_," said Virginia, softly; "but,--not now;" and Marian was a
bit too young to know why Lady Gadsby was smiling at Nina!

As Nancy found out about this, on Lady Gadsby's coming back to lunch,
that "old Branton Hills matron," as Gadsby found a lot of fun calling
"his baby girl," now-a-days, said, giggling:--

"No! Virginia! You'll _stay on solid ground!_"




XLII


Lady Gadsby and His Honor sat in Branton Hills' First Church, on a
hot July Sunday. Out-doors, twitting birds, lacy clouds, and gay
blossoms, told of happy hours in this long, bright month. Pastor Brown,
announcing a hymn, said:--

"This is a charming hymn. Our choir always sings it without company;
but today, I want _all_ you good folks to join in. Just pour forth your
joy and sing it, good and strongly."

That hymn had six stanzas; and Gadsby, noting an actually _grand_ bass
singing just back of him, thought of turning around, from curiosity;
and as that fifth stanza was starting, said to Lady Gadsby:--

"Do you know who that is, singing that grand bass part?"

Lady Gadsby didn't; but Lady Gadsby was a woman; and, from Noah's Ark
to Branton Hills' First Church, woman, as a branch of Mankind, was
curious. So a slow casual turning brought a dig in His Honor's ribs:--

"It's Norman Antor!"

Pastor Brown, standing at that big church door as folks, filing out
would stop for a word or two, said to Gadsby:--

"Young Antor is invariably in church, now-a-days. I may add to my
choir, and am thinking of putting him in it. I'm so glad to find out
about that boy winning his fight. I always _thought_ Norman would turn
out all right."

Pastor Brown was right; and two Branton Hills girls, a Salvation Army
lady, and a tiny tot of six had won crowns of Glory, from throwing rays
of light into two badly stagnant Minds.




XLIII


Thirty-six months. That's not so long a run in daily affairs, and this
Branton Hills history finds Thanksgiving Day dawning. In Branton Hill's
locality it is not, customarily, what you would call a cold day. Many a
Thanksgiving has had warm, balmy air, and without snow; though, also,
without all that vast army of tiny chirping, singing, buzzing things
on lawn or branch. But contrast has its own valuation; for, through
it, common sights, vanishing annually, show up with a happy joy, upon
coming back. Ah! That first faint coloring of grass, in Spring! That
baby bud, on shrub or plant, shyly asking our loving South Wind if
it's all right to pop out, now. That sprouting of big brown limbs on
oak and birch; that first "blush of Spring" in orchards; that first
furry, fuzzy, cuddly spray of pussy willows! Spring and Fall; two big
points in your trip along your Pathway. Fall with its rubbish from
months of labor: cornstalks, brown, dry grass, old twigs lying around,
wilting plants; bright colorings blazing in distant woodlands; chill
winds crawling in through windows, at night. And Spring! Pick-up,
paint-up, wash-up Spring!! So, as I said, Branton Hills got around to
Thanksgiving Day; that day on which as many of a family as possibly can
should sit around a common board; coming from afar, or from only a door
or two away.

Gadsby's dining-room was not big; it had always sat but six in his
family. But, on _this_ Thanksgiving Day,--hmmm! "Wait, now--uh-huh,
that's it. Just run that pair of sliding doors back, put that parlor
lamp upstairs; and that piano? Why not roll it out into my front hall?
I know it will look odd, but you can't go through a Thanksgiving 'soup
to nuts' standing up. _Got_ to jam in chairs, any old way!"

But who is all this mob that will turn His Honor's dining-room into a
thirty-foot hall? I'll look around, as our happy, laughing, singing,
clapping group sits down to Gadsby's Thanksgiving party.

I find _two_ "posts of honor;" (My gracious! _so_ far apart!); His
Honor, with carving tools filling dish, dish, and dish.

"Atta boy! Atta girl! Pass up your chow-dish! This bird has but two
drum-sticks, but six of his cousins wait, out in our cook-shop! Lots of
grub! What's that, Julius? A bit of dark? Want any gravy?"

At Post Two sits "Ma;" again in that good old buxom condition, so
familiar to all Branton Hills:--

"Right this way, folks, for potato, squash, onions, carrots and
turnip!!"

_What_ a happy bunch! Following around from Gadsby, sit Bill, Lucy and
Addison. But whoa! Who's this Addison? Oh, pardon; I forgot all about
it. Lucy's baby; and his first Thanksgiving. Hi, you! Tut-tut! Mustn't
grab raisins! Naughty, naughty! On Lucy's right sit Mary, Julius
and Norman; following along, I find Nancy, Frank and Baby Lillian,
Kathlyn, John, Lady Standish, Priscilla and Hubby Arthur Rankin; Nina
Adams,--Oh! A _thousand_ pardons!!--Nina _Simpkins!_ and Old Bill. Say!
You wouldn't know Bill! Bright, happy, laughing, singing, and tapping
a cup with his spoon; spick-span suit, and that now famous "Broadway
carnation." Hulloa, Bill; you old sport!! Glad to find you looking so
happy! _What?_ _Two_ whacks at that bird? Why Bill!! On Bill's right
sits Pastor Brown, old Doctor Wilkins, Harold, Virginia, and Patricia.
Oh, pardon again! Patricia, Virgina's baby; just six months old, today,
and valiantly trying to swallow a half-pound candy cow! Following
around I find Old Tom Young, Sarah, and Paul. No, I don't find a
high-chair by Sarah; but Sarah sits just rocking, rocking, rocking,
now-a-days. Following on, again, is Old Tom Donaldson, Clancy Dowd,
_and_--Old Lady Flanagan, with "this dom thing I calls hoosband!" And
lastly, Marian and old Pat Ryan from our railway station's trunk room.

So it was just laugh, talk, "stuff," and--

       *       *       *       *       *

Oh, hum! Folks can't stay all night, you know; so, finally, groups and
pairs, drifting out, all had happy words for His Honor and Lady Gadsby;
and His Honor, a word or two; for you know Gadsby _can_ talk? So it
was:--

"Good night, Nina; good luck, Old Bill! Oh! say, Bill; will _that_
cigar blow up? Good night, Virginia; and ta-ta Patricia; and Virginia,
you mind your Ma and stay down on solid ground! Aha, Clancy! You old
motor-pump fan! No; that's wrong; _animal-drawn_ pump! Good night,
Pastor Brown; so glad you put Norman in your choir. And now Old Tom
and Sarah! Tom, you look as young as on that day on which you brought
Sarah, just a tiny, squalling, fist-waving bunch, to this porch to ask
about adoption! And I know Sarah has always had a kind, loving Dad.
Paul, you young sprout! As _you_ turn into a daddy, soon now, you'll
find that, on marrying, a man and woman start actually living. It's
miraculous, Paul, that's just what it is."

And so it was; pairs and groups shaking hands and laughing, until
finally a big buxom woman sang out:--

"_Whoops!!_ It was a _wow_ of a grub-lay-out! It _was_ thot! But this
dom thing I calls hoosband. Say! You grub-stuffin' varmint! Phwat's
that in your hat? A droom-stick, is it? Do you want His Honor to think
I don't cook nuthin' for you? Goodnight, all! I'm thot full I'm almost
a-bustin'!"

As Lady Standish shook hands, that worthy woman said:--

"John, what you did for Branton Hills should go into our National
Library at Washington, in plain sight."

"Sally, _Youth's_ part was paramount in all that work. All I did was to
boss;" and Old Doc Wilkins, coming out, nibbling a bunch of raisins,
said:--

"Uh-huh; but a boss must know his job!"

"That's all right," said Gadsby; "but it was _young hands and young
minds_ that did my work! Don't disqualify Youth for it will fool you,
if you do!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A glorious full moon sails across a sky without a cloud. A crisp night
air has folks turning up coat collars and kids hopping up and down for
warmth. And that giant star, Sirius, winking slyly, knows that soon,
now, that light up in His Honor's room window will go out. Fttt! It
_is_ out! So, as Sirius and Luna hold an all-night vigil, I'll say a
soft "Good-night" to all our happy bunch, and to John Gadsby--Youth's
Champion.




FINIS GADSBY 




A VOID


SUMMARY

I N T R O D U C T I O N In which, as you will soon find out,

Damnation has its origin vii

I A N T O N V O W L

1 Which at first calls to mind a probably familiar story of a

drunk man waking up with his brain in a whirl 3

2 In which luck, God's alias and alibi, plays a callous trick on a

suitor cast away on an island 12

3 Concluding with an immoral papacy's abolition and its

claimant's contrition 25

4 Which, notwithstanding a kind of McGujfin, has no ambition

to rival Hitchcock 37

6 Which, following a compilation of a polymath's random

jottings, will finish with a visit to a zoo 44

7 In which an unknown individual has it in for Moroccan

solicitors 57

8 In which you will find a word or two about a burial mound

that brought glory to Trajan 69

III D O U G L A S H A I G C L I F F O R D

9 In which an amazing thing occurs to an unwary basso profunda 81

10 Which will, I trust, gratify fanatics of Pindaric lyricism 93

11 Which will finish by arousing pity in a big shot 110

12 In which an umbilical ruby avails a bastard's anglicisation 122

13 On a fantastic charm that a choral work by Anton Dvorak

starts to cast on a billiard board 128

14 In which you will find a carp scornfully turning down a halva

fit for a king 140

I V O L G A M A V R O K H O R D A T O S

15 In which, untying a long string of fabrications and

falsifications, you will find out at last what sank that imposing

Titanic 155

16 Which will furnish a probationary boost to a not always

almighty dollar ($) 163

17 In which you will know what Vladimir Ilich thought of

Hollywood 170

18 For which many will no doubt claim that it adds much that

is crucial to our story 174

19 On running a risk by asking for a fish farci 184

20 Which, notwithstanding two paragraphs full of brio and

inspiration, will draw to an ominous conclusion 196

V A M A U R Y C O N S O N

21 In which, following a pithy summary of our plot so far, a fourth

fatality will occur, that of a man who has had a significant

part to play in this book 207

22 In which you will find an old family custom obliging a brainy

youth to finish his Gradus ad Parnassum with six killings 221

23 In which an anxious sibling turns a hoard of cash found in a

drum to fairly satisfactory account 238

24 Which, starting with a downcast husband, will finish with a

furious sibling 253

V I A R T H U R W I L B U R G S A V O R G N A N

25 Which contains, in its last paragraph, a highly significant

blank 265

26 Which, as you must know by now, is this book's last 273

P O S T S C R I P T On that ambition, so to say, which lit its

author's lamp 281





INTRODUCTION


In which, as you will soon find out, Damnation

has its origin

Today, by radio, and also on giant hoardings, a rabbi, an admiral

notorious for his links to Masonry, a trio of cardinals, a trio, too,

of insignificant politicians (bought and paid for by a rich and

corrupt Anglo-Canadian banking corporation), inform us all of

how our country now risks dying of starvation. A rumour, that's

my initial thought as I switch off my radio, a rumour or possibly

a hoax. Propaganda, I murmur anxiously  as though, just by

saying so, I might allay my doubts  typical politicians' propa-

ganda. But public opinion gradually absorbs it as a fact. Indi-

viduals start strutting around with stout clubs. "Food, glorious

food!" is a common cry (occasionally sung to Bart's music), with

ordinary hard-working folk harassing officials, both local and

national, and cursing capitalists and captains of industry. Cops

shrink from going out on night shift. In Macon a mob storms a

municipal building. In Rocadamour ruffians rob a hangar full of

foodstuffs, pillaging tons of tuna fish, milk and cocoa, as also a

vast quantity of corn - all of it, alas, totally unfit for human

consumption. Without fuss or ado, and naturally without any

sort of trial, an indignant crowd hangs 26 solicitors on a hastily

built scaffold in front of Nancy's law courts (this Nancy is a

town, not a woman) and ransacks a local journal, a disgusting

right-wing rag that is siding against it. Up and down this land

of ours looting has brought docks, shops and farms to a virtual

standstill.

Arabs, blacks and, as you might say, non-goyim fall victim to

vii

racist attacks, with pogroms forming in such outlying Parisian

suburbs as Drancy, Livry-Gargan, Saint-Paul, Villacoublay and

Clignancourt. And stray acts of brutality abound: an anonymous

tramp has his brains blown out just for a bit of moronic fun, and

a sacristan is callously spat upon  in public, too - whilst giving

absolution to a CRS man cut in half by a blow from a yataghan

(a Hungarian slicing tool, if you must know).

You'd kill your own kith and kin for a chunk of salami, your

cousin for a crust, your crony for a crouton and just about any-

body at all for a crumb.

On 6 April, from Saturday night until Sunday morning, 25

Molotov cocktails go off around town. Pilots bomb Orly airport.

Paris's most familiar landmarks burn down, and its inhabitants

look on in horror at a still blazing Alhambra, an Institut that is

nothing but a sad, smoking ruin, a Saint-Louis Hospital with all

its windows alight and gaily flaming away. From Montsouris to

Nation not a wall is intact.

Opposition MPs add insult to injury by baiting a now almost

suicidal ruling party, which, though obviously hurt by such an

affront to its dignity, has a fair stab at smoothing things out. But

whilst assassins start liquidating a handful of junior Quai d'Orsay

officials (23, or so it's said), a Dutch diplomat caught filching an

anchovy from a tub of fish is soon put paid to by an impromptu

stoning. And whilst an odiously smug and arrogant viscount in

shocking pink spats (sic) is laid into by Wagram's hoi polloi until

his skin is of a similarly shocking colour (his only fault, it turns

out, was to qualify starvation, to a dying man who had put his

hand out for a coin, as just too, too boring for words), in Raspail

a tall, blond Scandinavian, of actual Viking stock, riding a palo-

mino with blood pouring down its shanks and brandishing aloft

a long bow, starts firing arrows off at any local not to his liking.

A poor, starving, half-mad corporal purloins a bazooka and

mows down his battalion, commandant and all; and, on his

instant promotion to admiral by public acclaim, is just as instandy

slain by an adjutant with aspirations to match his own.

viii

In Paris a young man, a bit of a wag, no doubt nostalgic for

his country's military incursion into Indo-China, sprays napalm

up and down Faubourg Saint-Martin. In Lyon, upwards of a

million lost souls pass away, mostly martyrs to scurvy and typhus.

Acting without instructions, wholly on his own volition, an

idiot of a city official puts all pubs and clubs, poolrooms and

ballrooms, out of bounds - which prompts such a global craving

for alcohol (in fact, for oral gratification of any sort), such a

profound thirst for whisky or gin, vodka or rum, that it's just as

painful as going hungry. To cap it all, this particular May is

proving a scorchingly hot and sunny month: in Passy an omnibus

combusts without warning; and practically 60% of our popu-

lation go down with sunburn.

An Olympic oarsman climbs on to a rooftop and for an instant

attracts a mob of volcanically frothing fanatics, a mob that

abruptly crowns him king. Naturally, it asks him to adopt an

alias fully worthy of his royal rank and vocation. His own wish

is - wait for it - "Attila III"; what, by contrast, his champions

insist on calling him, is "Fantomas XVIII". As that isn't at all to

his fancy, his downfall is as dramatic as was his coronation. As

for Fantomas XXIII (who follows him - don't ask why), think

of a pompous ass sporting a top hat, a gaudy crimson sash, a

walking-stick with a solid gold tip and a palanquin to transport

him to Palais-Royal. With a crowd awaiting his arrival in triumph,

though, our poor monarch-for-a-day has his throat slit by an

assassin, a villain with a cold, malignant grin shouting, "Down

with tyrants! Forward for Ravaillac!" You'll find his tomb (King

Fantomas's, that is) in Paris's catacombs, which a commando

of impious vandals soon took to profaning  without actually

analysing why - and did so for six scandalous days and nights.

Following his burial our nation has had, in turn, a Frankish

king, a hospodar, a maharajah, 3 Romuli, 8 Alarics, 6 Atatiirks,

8 Mata-Haris, a Caius Gracchus, a Fabius Maximus Rullianus, a

Danton, a Saint-Just, a Pompidou, a Johnson (Lyndon B.), a lot

of Adolfs, a trio of Mussolinis, 5 Caroli Magni, a Washington,

ix

an Othon in opposition to a Hapsburg and a Timur Ling, who,

for his own part, got rid of 18 Pasionarias, 20 Maos and 28

Marxists (1 Chicist, 3 Karlists, 6 Grouchists and 18 Harpists).

Although, on sanitary grounds, a soi-disant Marat bans all bath-

taking, this sanctimonious fraud hoards a zinc tub for his own

scrotal ablutions; but, I'm happy to say, a back-stabbing (or ball-

stabbing, as word has it) from a Hitchcockian psychopath in drag

soon puts paid to his hypocrisy.

Following this assassination, a mammoth tank lobs mortars at

a tall municipal building into which Paris's administration has

withdrawn as though for a last, forlorn stand against anarchy.

Upright on its roof, a city councillor starts waving a flag of

pacification, proclaiming to all and sundry that total and uncon-

ditional abdication is at hand and assuring his public of his own

solidarity in any totalitarian call for martial law. Alas, this oppor-

tunistic U-turn is in vain: not caring to put any trust in his hollow

vows, any faith in his word of honour, without bargaining with

him or proposing any kind of ultimatum, his assailants forthwith

launch an all-out assault, razing to its foundations this surviving

bastion of authority.

God, what a world it is! Strung up for saying a word out of

turn! Slain for a sigh! Go on, attack anything you want! A bus,

a train, a taxi-cab, a postal van, a victoria! A baby in a pram, if

such is your fancy! A body in a coffin, if such is your fantasy!

Nobody will stop you. Nobody will know. You can go barging

through a hospital ward, lashing out at this man writhing in

agony or firing point-blank at that man with chronic arthritis and

no right arm. You can crucify as many phony Christs as you

wish. And nobody will mind if you drown an alcoholic in alcohol,

a pharmacist in formol, a motorcyclist in lubricating oil.

Boil infants in cauldrons, burn politicians to a crisp, throw

solicitors to lions, spill Christian blood to its last drop, gas all

shorthand typists, chop all pastrycooks into tiny bits, and circus

clowns, call girls, choirboys, sailors, actors, aristocrats, farm-

hands, football hooligans and Boy Scouts.

You can loot shops or ravish shopgirls, maim or kill. Worst of

all, nothing can stop you now from fabricating and propagating

all sorts of vicious rumours. But stay on your guard, don't trust

anybody  and watch out for your back.

xi

I

ANTON VOWL

1

Which at first calls to mind a probably familiar story

of a drunk man waking up with his brain in a whirl

Incurably insomniac, Anton Vowl turns on a light. According to

his watch it's only 12.20. With a loud and languorous sigh Vowl

sits up, stuffs a pillow at his back, draws his quilt up around his

chin, picks up his whodunit and idly scans a paragraph or two;

but, judging its plot impossibly difficult to follow in his con-

dition, its vocabulary too whimsically multisyllabic for comfort,

throws it away in disgust.

Padding into his bathroom, Vowl dabs at his brow and throat

with a damp cloth.

It's a soft, warm night and his blood is racing through his

body. An indistinct murmur wafts up to his third-floor flat. Far

off, a church clock starts chiming - a chiming as mournful as a

last post, as an air-raid alarm, as an SOS signal from a sinking

ship. And, in his own vicinity, a faint lapping sound informs him

that a small craft is at that instant navigating a narrow canal.

Crawling across his windowsill is a tiny animal, indigo and

saffron in colour, not a cockroach, not a blowfly, but a kind of

wasp, laboriously dragging a sugar crumb along with it. Hoping

to crush it with a casual blow, Vowl lifts up his right hand; but

it abruptly flaps its wings, flying off without giving its assailant

an opportunity to do it any harm.

Hand-tapping a military march on his thighs, Vowl now walks

into his pantry, finds a carton of cold milk, pours it out into a

bowl and drinks it down to its last drop. Mmmm . . . how

scrumptious is milk at midnight. Now for a cosy armchair, a

3

Figaro to look at and a good Havana cigar, notwithstanding that

its rich and smoky flavour is bound to sit oddly in his mouth

with that of milk.

And music, too, radio music, but not this idiotic cha-cha-cha.

(A casual fiddling of knobs.) Ah, a boston, and now a tango,

and a foxtrot, and now a jazzy, harmonically spiky cotillion d la

Stravinsky. Dutronc singing a ballad by Lanzmann, Barbara a

madrigal by Aragon, Stich-Randall an aria from Aida.

Probably nodding off for an instant or two, Vowl abruptly sits

up straight. "And now for a public announc-. . ." Damn that

static! Vowl starts twiddling knobs again until his transistor radio

booms out with clarity. But no particularly significant communi-

cation is forthcoming. In Valparaiso an inauguration of a viaduct

kills 25; in Zurich a Cambodian diplomat "has it on good auth-

ority that Norodom Sihanouk is not planning to visit Richard

Nixon in Washington"; in Paris Pompidou puts forward a non-

partisan proposal for improving conditions in industry, but a

majority of unionists outflank him with a radical (and frankly

Marxist) social contract. Racial conflict in Biafra; rumours of a

putsch in Conakry. A typhoon has hit Nagasaki, and a tornado

(known to aficionados as Amanda) is about to lay Tristan da

Cunha in ruins: its population is waiting for a squadron of

Brazilian aircraft to fly it out in toto.

Finally, at Roland-Garros, in a Davis Cup match against

Darmon, Santana has won 6 - 3 , 16, 36, 108, 86.

Vowl turns off his radio, sits down on a rug in his living room,

starts inhaling lustily and trying to do push-ups, but is atrociously

out of form and all too soon, his back curving, his chin jutting

out, curls up in a ball, and, staring raptly at his Aubusson,

succumbs to a fascination with a labyrinth of curious and transi-

tory motifs that swim into his vision and vanish again.

Thus, on occasion, a sort of parabola, not fully confocal in

form and fanning out into a horizontal dash  akin to a capital

G in a mirror.

Or, as achromatic as a swan in a snowstorm, and rising out of

4

a diaphanous mist, an imposing portrait of a king brandishing a

harpoon.

Or, just for an instant, an abstract motif without any form at

all, but for two Kandinskian diagonals, along with a matching

pair, half as long and slighdy awry - its fuzzy contours trying, if

in vain, to draw a cartoon hand, which is to say, a hand with

four digits and no thumb. (If you should find that puzzling, look

hard at Bugs Bunny's hands or Donald Duck's).

Or again, abrupdy surfacing and just as abrupdy fading, a wasp

humming about, with, on its inky black thorax, a triangular rash

of chalky markings.

His mind runs riot. Lost in thought, scrutinising his rug, Vowl

starts imagining 5, 6, 26 distinct visual combinations, absorbing

but also insubstantial, as though an artist's rough drafts but of

what? - that, possibly, which a psychiatrist would call Jungian

slips, an infinity of dark, mythic, anonymous portraits flitting

through his brain, as it burrows for a solitary, global signal that

might satisfy his natural human lust for signification both instant

and lasting, a signal that might commandingly stand out from this

chain of discontinuous links, this miasma of shadowy tracings, all

of which, or so you would think, ought to knit up to form a

kind of paradigmatic configuration, of which such partial motifs

can furnish only anagrams and insipid approximations:

a body crumpling up, a hoodlum, a portrait of an artist as a

young dog;

a bullock, a Bogartian falcon, a brooding blackbird;

an arthritic old man;

a sigh;

or a giant grampus, baiting Jonah, trapping Cain, haunting

Ahab: all avatars of that vital quiddity which no ocular straining

will pull into focus, all ambiguous substitutions for a Grail of

wisdom and authority which is now lost - now and, alas, for

always - but which, lost as it is, our protagonist will not

abandon.

5

Staring at his rug in this way starts grating on Vowl, who, a

victim of optical illusions, of sly tricks that his imagination is

playing on him, starts to fancy that a focal point is at long last

within his grasp, though just as it's about to solidify it sinks again

into a void.

But Vowl insists, stubbornly hangs in, without trying to sur-

mount his fascination, without struggling to kick his habit. It's

almost as though, intrinsic to his rug, to its vitals, in a way, is a

solitary strand looping around a vanishing point - Alpha, you

might call it - as though, acting as a mirror to all unity and

harmony, such a point might grant him a synoptic vision of

cosmic infinity, a protological point of origin gradually maturing

into a global panorama, an abysmal chasm discharging X-rays

(which is to say, not a radiographical "X" but that, in maths,

indicating an unknown quantity), a virgin tract of curving

coasdands and circuitous contours which Vowl cannot stop

tracing, as grimly and untiringly as a convict pacing back and

forth along his prison wall, pacing, pacing, pacing, without any

notion of scaling it. . .

For four days and nights Vowl works hard at his oblong rug,

squatting and crouching on it, languishing and lying in ambush,

straining at his imagination so as to catch sight of its missing

strand, so as to construct an occult fiction around it, wilting,

cracking up, pursuing an illusion of instant salvation in which it

would all unfold in front of him.

It starts suffocating him. Not a hint nor an inkling drifts his

way, nor again that kind of involuntary illumination that may on

occasion turn out fruitful, but myriad combinations floating in

and out of his brain, now amorphous, now polymorphous, now

just within his grasp, now as far from it as it was within it,

now a common, ordinary, almost banal thing, now dark, sly and

cryptic, a faint and riddling murmur, an oracular form of mumbo

jumbo. In a word, an imbroglio.



* * *

6

Notwithstanding a cup of hot cocoa and a cordial of allobarbital,

opium or laudanum, a moist cloth on his brow and a slow

countdown from 100 to 1, Vowl simply can't stop tossing and

turning on his pillow.

Finally, oblivion - but only for a blissful half-hour or so. For,

just as a church clock is chiming half-past two, Vowl sits up again

with a start, his body twitching uncontrollably. Soon, too, his

vision starts haunting him again, it brutally assails him, it swims

into but also, sad to say, out of focus. For a capricious, all too

capricious, instant light dawns on him.

At that point Vowl would hastily hunch down on his rug,

but only to confront a conundrum: nothing, nothing at all, but

irritation at an opportunity knocking so loudly and so vainly,

nothing but frustration at a truth so dormant and frail that, on

his approach, it sinks away into thin air.

So, now as vigilant as a man who has had an invigorating nap,

abandoning his pillow, pacing up and down on his living-room

floor, drinking, staring out of his window, taking down a book,

switching his radio on and off, putting on his suit and coat, Vowl

would go out, would stay out all night, in a bar, or at his club,

or, climbing into his car (although driving was hardly his strong

point), would motor off around Paris's suburbs on a whim,

without having any particular goal in mind: to Chantilly or

Aulnay-sous-Bois, Limours or Rancy, Dourdon or Orly, and as

far as Saint-Malo - but to no avail.

Half out of his wits with insomnia, Vowl is willing to try almost

anything that might assist him in dozing off - a pair of pyjamas

with bright polka dots, a nightshirt, a body stocking, a warm

shawl, a kimono, a cotton sari from a cousin in India, or simply

curling up in his birthday suit, arranging his quilt this way and

that, switching to a cot, to a crib, a foldaway, a divan, a sofa and

a hammock, lying on his back, on his stomach, or with arms

akimbo, casting off his quilt or placing a thick, hairy tartan rug

on top of it, borrowing a plank of nails from a fakir or practising

7

a yoga position taught him by a guru (and which consists of

forcing an arm hard against your skull whilst taking hold of your

foot with your hand) and finally paying for a room in lodgings

- but without anything satisfactory to show for it.

It's all in vain. His subconscious vision starts buzzing around

him again, buzzing around and within him, choking and suffocat-

ing him.

Sympathising with his unusual condition, a good Samaritan living

two doors away opts to accompany him to a local hospital for a

consultation. A young GP jots down his particulars and insists on

his submitting to palpations, auscultations and X-rays, a diagnosis

with which Vowl is happy to comply. "Is your condition painful?"

this young GP asks him. "Sort of," Vowl blandly informs him. And

what is its principal symptom? Chronic insomnia. What about

taking a syrup last thing at night? Or a cordial? "I did," says Vowl,

"but it had no impact." Conjunctivitis? No. A dry throat?

Occasionally. An aching brow? And how! A humming sound in

his auditory ducts? "No, but all last night, an odd kind of wasp

was buzzing around my room." A wasp - or possibly an imaginary

wasp? "Isn't it your job to find out," asks Vowl laconically.

At which point Vowl pays a visit to an otolaryngologist, Dr.

Cochin, a jovial sort of chap, balding, with long auburn mutton-

chops, bifocals dangling on a chain across his plump stomach, a

salmon pink cravat with black polka dots, and, in his right hand,

a cigar stinking of alcohol. Cochin asks him to cough and say

"Ahhhh", puts a tiny circular mirror into his mouth, draws a

blob of wax out of his auditory organs (as doctors say), starts

poking at his tympanum and massaging his larynx, his naso-

pharynx, his right sinus and his nasal partition. It's a good,

thoroughgoing job and it's a pity that Cochin can't stop irritat-

ingly whisding throughout.

"Ouch!" moans Anton. "That hurts. . ."

"Shhh," murmurs his doctor soothingly. "Now what do you

say to our trotting downstairs for an itsy-bitsy X-ray?"

8

Laying Vowl flat on his back along a cold, shiny, clinical-

looking couch, pushing a pair of buttons, flicking a switch down

and turning off a lamp so that it's pitch dark, Cochin X-rays him

and lights up his laboratory again. Vowl instandy shifts back to

a sitting position.

"No, don't sit up!" says Cochin. "I'm not through with you,

you know. I ought to look for hints of auto-intoxication."

Plugging in a circuit, Cochin brings out what a layman would

call a small platinum pick, akin to nothing so much as a humdrum

Biro, puts it against Vowl's skull and consults, on a print-out,

an X and Y graph, its rhythmic rising and falling charting his

blood circulation.

"It's too high, much too high," says Cochin at last, tapping

his apparatus, noisily sucking on his cigar and rolling it around his

mouth. "It shows a constriction of your frontal sinus. A surgical

incision is our only solution."

"An incision!"

"'Fraid so, old boy. If not, don't you know, you'll finish up

with a bad croup."

Although all of this is said so flippandy that Vowl starts to

think Cochin is joking, such gallows humour in a doctor cannot

fail to disturb him. Bringing his shirt-tail up to his lips and spit-

ting blood on to it, our invalid snorts with disgust, "Fuck you,

you . . . you quack! I ought to go to an ophthalmologist!"

"Now now," murmurs Cochin in a conciliatory mood. "With

an immuno-transfusion or two I'll know what prognosis to adopt.

But first things first - I must obtain an analysis."

Cochin rings for his assistant, who turns up clad in a crimson

smock.

"Rastignac, go to Foch, Saint-Louis or Broca and bring back

an anti-conglutinant vaccination. And I want it in my laboratory

by noon!"

Now Cochin starts dictating his diagnosis to a shorthand

typist.

"Anton Vowl. Consultation of 8 April: a common cold, an

9

auto-intoxication of his naso-pharynx, which could possibly put

his olfactory circuit out of action, and a constriction of his frontal

sinus with a hint of mucal inflammation right up to his sublingual

barbs. As any inoculation of his larynx would bring about a

croup, my proposal is an ablation of his sinus in such a way as

to avoid damaging his vocal chords."

Vowl, according to Cochin, shouldn't worry too much, for if

ablation of a sinus is still a ticklish proposition, it's had a long

history dating as far back as Louis XVIII. It is, in short,

an incision any physician worth his salt can carry out. Within

10 days, should Vowl hold firm, his throat won't hurt him

at all.

So Vowl stays in hospital. His ward contains 26 cots, most of

its occupants striking him as, frankly, mortuary carrion. To calm

him down Cochin drugs him with such soporifics as Largactyl,

Atarax and Procalmadiol. At 8 a.m. an important consultant starts

doing his round, with a cohort of aspiring young doctors

accompanying him, drinking in his words of wisdom, dutifully

chuckling at his bons mots. This lofty individual would accost a

visibly dying man and, airily tapping him on his arm, solicit from

him a lugubrious smirk; would comfort anybody incurably ill

with an amusing or a consoling word; would charm a sick child

with a lollipop and his fond mama with a toothy grin; and,

confronting a handful of almost moribund invalids, would pro-

pound an instant diagnosis: malaria, Parkinson's, bronchitis, a

malignant tumour, a postnatal coma, syphilis, convulsions, palpi-

tations and a torticollis.

Within two days or so Vowl, laid out flat, swallows a drug, a

kind of liquid chloroform, that knocks him unconscious. Cochin

slowly and cautiously installs a sharp nib up his right nostril. This

incision in his olfactory tract producing a naso-dilation, Cochin

profits from it by quickly scarifying Vowl's partition with a

surgical pin, scraping it with a burin and closing it up with a

tool thought up not long ago by a brilliant Scotsman. Now our

10

otolaryngologist taps his sinus, cuts out a malign fungus and

finally burns off his wound.

"Good," - this said to his assistant, who is almost numb with

fright - "I think our oxydisation is going to work. Anyway, I

can't find any sign of inflammation."

Cochin briskly starts swabbing Vowl's wound, stitching it up

with catgut and bandaging it. For 24 hours a slight risk subsists

of trauma or shock; but, promisingly, his scar knits up without

complication.

Vowl has to stay in hospital for six days, until, at last, a grinning

Cochin allows him to go. I might add, though, that his insomnia

is still as chronically bad, if not now so agonisingly painful, as it

always was.

11

1

In which luck, God's alias and alibi, plays a callous

trick on a suitor cast away on an island

Laid out languorously, all day long, on a couch or on a sofa, or

on occasion rocking to and fro in his rocking chair, stubbornly

trying to copy out on an old visiting-card that indistinct motif

that had sprung at him from his rug, as frail as an infant but not

now, thanks to Cochin's surgical skills, in all that much physical

pain, our protagonist starts hallucinating, blowing his mind.

As though in a slow-motion film, Vowl is walking down a corri-

dor, its two high walls dwarfing him. To his right is a mahogany

stand on which sit 26 books - on which, I should say, 26 books

normally ought to sit, but, as always, a book is missing, a book

with an inscription, "5", on its flap. Nothing about this stand,

though, looks at all abnormal or out of proportion, no hint of a

missing publication, no filing card or "ghost", as librarians

quaintly call it, no conspicuous gap or blank. And, disturbingly,

it's as though nobody knows of such an omission: you had to

work your way through it all from start to finish, continually

subtracting (with 25 book-flaps carrying inscriptions from "1"

to "26", which is to say, 26  25 = 1) to find out that any

book was missing; it was only by following a long and arduous

calculation that you'd know it was "5".

Vowl is avid to grasp a book, any book at all, in his hand, to

study its small print (with a possibility of chancing across an

important fact, a crucial tip) but in vain; his groping hand is,

alas, too far away for any physical contact. But what (his mind

12

runs on), what would such a book contain? Possibly a colossal,

a cosmic dictionary? A Koran, a Talmud or a Torah? A magnum

opus, a Black Book of black magic, cryptograms and occult

mumbo jumbo . . .

A unit is lacking. An omission, a blank, a void that nobody but

him knows about, thinks about, that, flagrantly, nobody wants to

know or think about. A missing link.

Now, still hallucinating, Vowl scans his Figaro and finds it full

of startling information, both significant and trivial:

BANNING OF CP

NOT A C O M M U N I S T IN P A R I S !

*

If you wish to wrap anything up  no ribbon, no strings

BUY S C O T C H !

F I N A N C I A L SCANDAL I M P L I C A T I N G

A R I N G OF S P I V S

A vision now assails him: of a filthy sandwich-man, practically a

tramp, his clothing in rags, handing out tracts with a myopic and

haggard air, mumbling to nobody in particular and buttonholing

any unlucky individual crossing his path with a rambling story

of how consumption of fruit will cut down lust - a typical crank,

in short, a madman, a pitiful laughing-stock. An urchin, warming

to his cry of "A million, a billion birds will vanish from our sky!",

pins a baby chick on to his mackintosh.

"Oh, how idiotic," murmurs Vowl. But just as idiotic, now, is

his vision of a man going into a bar:

MAN, sitting down and barking (with gruff and, as you might

say, military incivility): Barman!

13

B A R M A N (who knows a thing or two): Morning, mon

Commandant.

C O M M A N D A N T (calming down now that, although in mufti, his

rank is plain to this barman): Ah, good morning to you, my boy,

good morning!

BARMAN (who has a slight but distinct hint of Oirishry about

him): And what, pray, can I do for you, sir? Your wish is my

command.

C O M M A N D A N T (licking his lips): You know what I fancy most

of all - a port-flip.

B A R M A N (frowning)-. What? A port-flip!

C O M M A N D A N T (vigorously nodding): That's right, a port-flip!

Any port-flip in a storm, what? Ha ha ha!

B A R M A N (as though in pain): I . . . don't . . . think . . . any

. .. in .. . stock . . .

COMMANDANT^ jumping up off his stool): What, no port-flips!

But only last month I had (laboriously counting out) 1, 2, no,

3 port-flips in this bar!

B A R M A N (almost inaudibly): But now . . . now . . . you

can't. . .

C O M M A N D A N T (furiously pointing in front of him): Now look,

that's port, isn't it?

B A R M A N (in agony): Uh huh . . . but. . .

C O M M A N D A N T (livid): So? So? And (pointing again) that's

an. . .

B A R M A N (abruptly dying): Aaaaaaah! Shhhhhhh . . . R.I.P.

C O M M A N D A N T (about to go but first noticing his body): What

a storm in a port-flip!

Which is what you might call adding insult to injury.

Vowl isn't always in such good humour, though (in so far as this

vision of his can claim much humour at all), occasionally taking

fright, starting up in panic, his blood curdling. For what if a

crouching Sphinx is about to attack him?

1 4

Day in, day out, and month in, month out, his hallucination

would go on distilling its poison - akin to an addiction, to opium

having him in its thrall, to a suit of armour imprisoning him.

At night, his spotting an ant or a cockroach scrambling on top

of his window crossbar only to fall back down again would,

without his knowing why, instil within him a profound dis-

comfort, as though so tiny an animal could function as a symbol

of his own bad luck.

At night, too, just as dawn is rising, his habitual fantasy, d la

Kafka, is of tossing and turning on his hot, damp pillow, without

anything at all to hold on to, as though caught in a sort of iron

cuirass and growing a carrion crow's claws, claws that would start

writhing about to no avail. Nobody would rush to assist him.

Not a sound would disturb his long nocturnal vigil - but, at

most, for a monotonous drip-drip-drip from a tap running in his

bathroom. For who would know of his plight? Who would find

a solution to it, now and for always? Did any dictionary contain

a word that, only by pronouncing it, would calm his morbid

condition? Slowly asphyxiating, Vowl gasps for air. His lungs

burn. His throat hurts as much as though sawn in half. Trying

to call for aid, his lips, crinkly from a moribund grin that also

starts wrinkling his brow, form only a dry, mournful cough. As

panicky as a pig in an abattoir, sobbing, panting and suffocating,

shaking, rattling and rolling about, his pupils dilating, a crippling

load cracking his ribs, a flow of black blood oozing continuously

from his tympanic cavity, a monstrous tumour bulging out of

his right arm, from which a catarrhal pus would occasionally

squirt, Vowl is visibly shrinking, losing from four to six pounds

a day. His hand is now nothing but a stump. His physiognomy,

ruddy, jowly, puffy and thick of lip, sways to and fro atop his

tall, scrawny stalk of a throat. And as always, torturing him,

throttling him, that clammy whiplash, as of a boa constrictor, as

of a python, as of a python out of Monty Python, would coil and

curl and crush his torso with a flick of its tail. His discs would

15

slip and his ribs would snap  with nary a word, nary a cry,

issuing from his lips.

I'm dying, thinks Vowl. And with nobody to pour balm onto

my wounds, nobody to accompany my last hours, no sacristan

to grant absolution for my Original Sin, for nobody at all has an

inkling of my plight.

Now Vowl looks upwards and sights a carrion crow watchfully

circling him. In his room, all around him, sits a pack of animals

- plump black rats, stoats, rabbits, frogs and toads, a solitary

cockroach - as though on guard, lying in wait to ambush his

stiff carcass, anticipating a Gargantuan picnic. A falcon swoops

down on him. A jackal burrows out of Saharan sands to attack

him.

On occasion Vowl finds his imaginings alarming, on occasion

almost amusing: to finish up as a jackal's lunch, a snack for a rat

or nourishing bait for a falcon (a notion that brings to his mind

a book by Malcolm Lowry) has, as it had for Amphitryon, no

slight attraction for him.

But it's his chronic attraction to anything sickly that is of

utmost fascination to him. It's as though, for him, this is an

unambiguous sign confronting him with, and initiating him into:

Not annihilation (though annihilation is still at hand), not

damnation (though damnation is still at hand), but first of all

omission: a "no", a non-admission, a missing link.

Things may look normal and natural and logical, but a word

is but a faux-naif talisman, a structurally unsound platform from

which to sound off, as a world of total and horrifying chaos will

soon start to show through its sonorous inanity. Things may

look normal, things will go on looking normal, but in a day or

two, in 7 days, or 31, or 365, all such things will rot. A gap will

yawn, achingly, day by day, it will turn into a colossal pit, an

abyss without foundation, a gradual invasion of words by

margins, blank and insignificant, so that all of us, to a man, will

find nothing to say.

Without knowing why such an association is popping into his

16

mind at just this instant, Vowl now thinks of a book that was

bought by him in his youth, a book brought out by Gallimard

in its imprint La Croix du Sud, a work of fiction by Isidro Parodi -

or should I say Honorio Bustos Domaicq (if, to his compatriots,

known simply as Bioy) - an account of an amazing, astonishing

and also alarming calamity in which an outcast, a runaway pariah,

is caught up.

Call him Ishmail, too. Having had to sustain many, almost

inhuman hardships, this Ishmail drops anchor on an island that

is, at first sight, totally without inhabitants. Initially, things go

badly, with his almost dying of cold and starvation, burrowing

into a sand pit, shaking, suffocating, coming down with malaria,

curling up both day and night in a tight ball, simply waiting to

pass away.

But six days go past, and his unusually robust constitution

allows him finally to sit up and look around him. Our protagonist

is now disturbingly skinny but can still, if with difficulty, climb

out of his pit  a pit that was almost his tomb. So Ishmail

starts living again by first luxuriandy slaking his thirst; now

swallows an acorn but instandy spits it out in disgust; and soon

works out which fruits and mushrooms won't do him any harm.

A particular fruit (akin to an apricot) brings him out in a rash of

itchy, purplish spots, but bananas, avocados, nuts and kiwi fruit

abound.

At dusk, using a sharp rock, Ishmail cuts a notch on a stick

(to tick off his first night as a castaway); and, with a total of 20

such cuts, constructs a hut, a sort of impromptu shack, with a

door, four walls, and flooring and roofing built out of mud.

With no matchsticks at hand, though, his food is invariably raw.

Constant, too, is his panic that an animal might attack his camp;

but, as it turns out (such, anyway, is his supposition), no lynx

or puma, no jaguar, cougar or bison, stalks his island. At most,

comfortably far off, and only at sundown, a solitary orang-utan

prowling around but not caring (or daring?) to approach him.

17

And if it did, Ishmail had cut a stout club out of a mahogany

branch that would firmly put paid to any assailant.

This lasts a month. At which point, his physical condition

improving on an almost daily basis, our Robinson Ishmail (if I

may so call him) starts making a tour of his unknown Tristan da

Cunha, taking a full day to walk around it, his club in his hand,

and by nightfall pitching camp on top of a hill that would allow

him a panoramic command of his domain.

At dawn, cupping his hand to his brow and gazing about him,

Ishmail looks northwards and sights a kind of canal swirling and

foaming into marshland, and also, to his horror, not too far from

his hut, a row of mounds (akin to that sort known as tumuli), six

in all; cautiously slinks down towards this curious construction

(possibly a sort of windpiping?); and hazards an assumption (and

rightly so) that it's by a tidal flow that it functions.

Now, abrupdy, as it dawns on him what it is and of what it

consists, Ishmail starts noticing signs of habitation - a housing

compound, a radio installation, an aquarium.

But it all looks forlorn and vacant, its fountain as dry as a

structuralist monograph (and playing host to a trio of fat and

languorous armadillos), its pool mouldy with fungus.

As for its housing compound, it was built, circa 1930, in a

crypto-rococo fashion imitating, variously, a pink-icing casino in

Monaco, a bungalow on a Malayan plantation, a colonialist villa,

an ultra-chic condominium in Miami and Tara from GWTW.

Passing through a tall swing-door with slats and a mosquito

guard, you would walk along a corridor, about four yards high

and six yards long, taking you into a largish sitting room: on its

floor is a vast Turkish rug and, all around, divans, sofas, arm-

chairs, cushions and mirrors. A spiral stair winds up to a loggia.

From its roof, built out of a wood that, though light in colour,

is actually rock-hard (most probably sumac or sandalwood), a

thin aluminium cord, from which hangs a shiny brass ring of

outstanding craftsmanship, supports a colourful lamp no doubt

brought back from a trip to Japan and which casts a dim but

18

oddly milky light. Finally, via four bow windows inlaid with

gold, you could go out on to a balcony surmounting a fabulous

natural vista.

With a caution born of suspicion, Ishmail now pays this com-

pound a visit from top to bottom, from ground floor to loggia,

tapping its roof, its walls and its wainscoting, going through

its cupboards, not missing any nook or cranny and noting, in

particular, in a downstairs stock room, a labyrinthian circuit

which, linking up an oscillograph, a prismatic mirror, a two-way

radio, a hi-fi (with an apparatus to amplify its sound), a multi-

track rack and a strobo-cycloidal rotator, probably has a global

function unknown to him.

Not daring to pass a night in such unpromising surroundings,

Ishmail simply "borrows" as many tools as his arms can carry, as

also a big brass cauldron, a chopping board, a winnowing fan, a

matchbox or two and a hip flask brimming with whisky, and

quickly slips off to a clump of dark woodland not too far away,

in which stands a run-down shack; starts doing it up, allowing

not a day to go by without improving it; hunts, kills and cooks

rabbits; and, on his most fruitful raid, actually corrals an agouti

with his lasso, making bacon and ham, dripping and black pud-

ding, out of its carcass.

Days and days of this. Days of monsoons, of a curdling sky,

of ominous clouds amassing on its horizon, of a high, cold, gusty

wind blowing up all about him, of tidal troughs and billows,

of a foam-capp'd flood rushing inland, plashing and splashing,

washing and sploshing, anything in its path. Days of rain, rain,

rain.

Not long into his third month Ishmail sights a yacht putting

into port and dropping anchor off his island. Six individuals now

climb up to its casino, from which soon float out sounds of a

jazz band playing a foxtrot, a 30s "standard" that's obviously still

popular. At which point nothing again is as it was.

Though, initially, his instinct is to turn tail, to withdraw into his

19

shack, Ishmail cannot but find this situation intriguing and crawls

forward on all fours. What is going on? In a malodorous pool

choking with fungus, and around a shabby, unglamorous casino,

his visitors start swimming and dancing: a trio of guys, a match-

ing trio of dolls, plus a sort of footman adroidy mincing back

and forth with a tray of snacks, drinks and cigars. A tall, smiling,

muscular man - in his mid-20s at most - is particularly conspicu-

ous in a suit with a Mao collar and without any buttons down

its front, a Cardin fashion of long, long ago. His companion, a

man in his 30s with a tuft of bushy black hair on his chin, sporting

a stylish morning suit, sips from a glass of whisky, adds a dash

of soda and lazily hands it to a young woman - obviously his

girl - snoozing in a hammock.

"This is for you, Faustina. May I kiss you for it?"

"Why, thank you," says Faustina, half in a laugh, half in a huff.

"Ah, Faustina, what bliss I'd know if only . . . if only I could

. . . oh, you know what I'm trying to say . . ."

"Now now, I said no, no and no again. Why can't you and I

stay just good chums?" adds Faustina, fondling his hand for an

instant.

What a fascinating woman! thinks Ishmail, who now starts to

follow Faustina around, though naturally, as a runaway convict,

still afraid for his own skin. For who's to say that this group of

upstarts isn't harbouring a cop or a grass? What am I but an

oudaw, worth a king's ransom to any informant? As an outcast

from my own country, having had to fly from a tyrant as corrupt

as Caligula, as bad as any Borgia, how can I know that this

insignificant-looking yacht isn't on a kidnapping mission? Alas,

I don't know and I don't want to know; all I know is that, loving

this woman as I do, I want to know Faustina - Biblically.

Caring not for company, Faustina strolls about this way and

that, hips swinging lighdy to and fro. Finally Ishmail accosts his

inamorata, who is studying a book, Virginia Woolf's Orlando,

as it turns out.

"Miss, oh Miss, I'm sorry, awfully sorry, I . . . I had to talk to

2 0

you. It's just my hard luck if anybody spots us . . . I'm willing

to risk it. . ."

Alas! ignoring all his sighs and supplications, Faustina looks

straight through him.

At which point Ishmail falls victim to hallucinations, possibly from

consuming a poisonous black mushroom or having had too much

to drink; or, why not, from having shrunk so much as to vanish

wholly from sight, so that Faustina is nothing but a vision, a vision

passing right through his body; or, if not, from losing his mind,

going crazy, moonstruck, stark, staring mad, as though still stag-

nating in his filthy marshland and simply conjuring this vision out

of a bout of paranoia - casino, yacht, Faustina and all.

All right - but, if so, why, as though caught up in a warp in

chronology, should Ishmail again catch sight of a party uncannily

similar in both word and act to that of his first visit: dancing by

moonlight, Louis Armstrong playing a foxtrot. . . ?

All right  but, if so, worst of all (for Ishmail's fiction now

actually starts to nourish his own hallucinations, it's now that a

comparison of his own situation with that of Bioy's book, a

comparison that's possibly illusory and anyway naggingly hard to

pin down, will occur to critics), why, occasionally, whilst walking

along a corridor, should Ishmail abruptly find a door ajar in front

of him and a footman coming out with a tray in his hand and

why should this footman look glassily past him?

As though by instinct, Ishmail jumps out of his way, watching

him put a book, say, on top of a trunk and approaching it in his

turn to find out what's in it. But why is it so inhumanly hard

and smooth to his touch? No Titan, no Goliath, could lift up

such a book.

It's as though a cunning troll or hobgoblin has sought to statufy

all that is solid within and around this casino, to spray it with

poison gas or coat it with varnish, incrusting surfacings and

suffusing grains, controlling atoms and ions, so that nothing

stays for long as it was.

2 1

Things may look normal-, if Ishmail looks at a thing or at an

individual, it logically follows that that thing or individual is

actually in front of him; a sound (a laugh, a cry, a jazzy riff) is

just as loud in this world as in any normal world, an odour (of

a blossom, of a woman's hair) just as fragrant to his nostrils. Now

Faustina is lounging on a sofa among an array of silk cushions as

soft: and light and airy as balloons. Now his darling stands up

and walks out, abandoning on a cushion (as a gift to him?) a

bulky gold ring with a multi-carat diamond stud. Ishmail jumps

up, taking this ring as a sign, a sign that Faustina is his, but is

too afraid of that odious individual with his morning suit and

his glass of whisky - a husband? a suitor? just a companion? -

to admit it (for nobody could claim immunity from a Law making

of Ishmail an outcast, a pariah: nobody could touch him or stop

him from strolling back and forth; but nor was any human con-

scious of him at all).

Making contact with Faustina's cushion or ring for only an

instant, though, a numb, downcast, haggard Ishmail withdraws

his hand. What, again, occurs is that this cushion, say - a thing

normally as soft and downy as a baby's bottom - is, to his touch,

now a hard, cold, compact block, as rock-hard as a diamond, as

though part of a shadowy twin world consubstantial with

Ishmail's own but caught through a glass darkly, a living mirror

of our own world and just as cold, shiny and insular as a mirror.

A world, too, in which all that is human, or inhuman, maintains

a capacity for motion and action: thus Faustina can unlock a door

or charmingly languish on a sofa; thus that boorish individual

(as Ishmail cannot stop thinking of him) has no difficulty at all

pouring out a whisky-and-soda; nor, thus, has a jazz band any

difficulty striking up a foxtrot, a yacht docking, a woman drop-

ping a gold ring, a footman sashaying along a corridor holding a

tray. For anybody, though, not part of it all (which was obviously

Ishmail's plight), that world was nothing but a smooth, cyclical

continuum, without a fold in it, without any form of articulation,

as compact as stucco or staff, as putty or portland; an imbrication

2 2

of nights without adjoining days, a total lapidification, a flat,

hard, constant, monotonous uniformity in which all things, big

or small, smooth or lumpish, living or not, form a solitary, global

unit.

Though trying hard, straining with all his might, Ishmail can-

not bunch up a small and dainty silk cushion, for it's a cushion

of rock-solid silk; nor, though bringing his foot down hard on

it, disturb a tuft of hair on a Turkish rug; nor, with his hand,

turn a light-switch on and off. No, poor Ishmail is now an outcast

from two worlds.

Ishmail (as it slowly, far too slowly, dawns on him) is living in

a film, a film that was shot, wholly without his companions'

authorisation or approval, by M., Faustina's suitor, on a short

tour of his (Ishmail's) island in or about 1930.

Whilst a fatal malady attacks "his" island's baobabs, whilst a

mould crawling with tiny, malignant bugs starts to run riot in

its swimming pool, whilst its villa is rapidly going to wrack and

ruin, a haphazard sprinkling of raindrops all too soon turns into

a noisy downpour, a tropical monsoon, so that a concomitant

tidal flow, rising and falling, flooding that coastal construction

that Ishmail first saw from on top of a hill, activating its circuitry

(circuitry which had initially struck him as totally baffling) and

causing its dynamo to hum into motion, brings about a curious

and oddly tragic situation in which, word for word, act for act,

so many instants (instants long past but also immortal) visibly

start to shrink into what you might call ions of chronology, just

as, with an apparatus built from vitalium, Martial Cantaral would

allow any ghosdy carcass to act out, in a vast frigidarium, and

again and again right up to doomsday, a crucial instant from its

past.

Things look normal, but looks can play tricks on you. Things

at first look normal, till, abrupdy, abnormality, horrifying in its

inhumanity, swallows you up and spits you out.



* * *

2 3

Anton Vowl's ambition is to find out just what brand of affinity

links him with Bio/s book: on his rug, constantly assailing his

imagination, is his intuition of a taboo, his vision of a cryptic

sort of witchcraft, of a void, a thing unsaid: a vision, or loss of

vision, a mission or an omission, both all-knowing and knowing

nothing at all. Things may look normal, but. . .

But what?

Vowl simply cannot work it out.

2 4

1

Concluding with an immoral papacy's abolition and

its claimant's contrition

Days pass. Trying to work this thing out to his own satisfaction,

Vowl starts writing a diary, captioning it with just two words:

A V O I D

and continuing:

A void. Void of whom? Of what?

A curious motif runs (or ran or has run or might run)

through my Aubusson, but it isn't only a motif, it's also a

fount of wisdom and authority.

An imago as snug as a bug in my rug.

What, on occasion, it brings to mind is a painting by

Arcimboldo, a portrait of its own artist, possibly an

astonishing portrait of a haggard Dorian Gray, of a bilious

albino: an Arcimboldian jigsaw, not of shrimps and

crayfish, not of a cornucopia offruit, nor of snaky, tortuous

pistils twisting upwards to mimic a human brow or chin

or nostril, but of a swarming mass of sinuous bacilli of so

subtly skilful a combination that you know straightaway

that such a portrait had a body at its origin, without its

affording you at any instant a solitary distinguishing mark,

so obvious is it that it was its artist's ambition to fashion a

work which, by masking and unmasking, closing and

disclosing, turn and turn about, or mayhap in unison, would

hatch a plot but totally avoid giving it away.

2 5

It's hard, initially, to spot any modification at all. Tou

think at first that it's your own paranoia that's causing you

to find anomaly, abnormality and ambiguity all around

you. Abruptly, though, you know, or think you know, that

not too far off is ... a thing, an incarnation that distracts

you, acts upon you and numbs you. Things rot around

you. Tou panic, you sink into an unnatural sloth; you start

losing your mind. A sharp - though not, alas, so short -

shock chills you to your marrow. If this horror is only a

hallucination, it's a hallucination that you can't simply

throw off.

If only you had a word, a noun. If only you could shout

out: Aha, at last, now I know what it was that I found

so disturbing! If only you could jump for joy, jump up and

down, find a way out of this linguistic labyrinth, this

anagram of signification, this sixty-four-thousand-dollar

conundrum. But you simply can't fall back on any such

option: you must stubbornly go on, pursuing your vision to

its logical conclusion.

If only, oh if only you could pin down its point of origin,

that's all you ask. But it's all such a fog, it's all so

distant. . .

This diary lasts about six months. Day by day, as twilight falls,

Vowl jots down, in a typically finicky fashion, a host of insignifi-

cant notations: drank up all my provision of liquor, bought an

LP for my cousin Julot for passing his bac with flying colours,

took my Moroccan kaftan to a local laundry, said hullo to a man

living down my road notwithstanding that Azor, his pug-dog,

has a habit of shitting on my doormat, and so on; notations, too,

on his books, on his chums, on a puzzling word or an intriguing

fact (a QC at court who couldn't finish his oration; a hooligan

firing blank shots at nobody in particular; a compositor at a

printing plant wilfully vandalising his own typographic

apparatus . . . ).

2 6

Now and again, automatically clicking a Bic with his thumb,

Vowl would pass on to his own autobiography, would submit

his own past to psychological analysis, touching, most notably,

on his hallucination and Ishmail's island.

A particular day dawns on which it's a synopsis of a book, a

wholly imaginary book, that finds its way into his diary:

In a far country is found a small boy, Aignan, just two days

away from his fifth birthday and living in an old mansion that's

collapsing about him. This small boy has a nanny who, without

any warning at all, ups and says to him, "As a child, Aignan, you

had 25 cousins. Ah, what tranquil days - days without wars or

riots! But, abruptly, your cousins would start to vanish - to this

day nobody knows why. And, today, it's your turn to go away,

to withdraw from our sight, for, if you don't, it is, as Wordsworth

might put it  and you know, my darling," adds this palindromic

matron, "almost all of Wordsworth is worth words of almost

all - it is, I say, intimations of mortality for all of us."

So Aignan slinks away out of town. And in classic Bildungs-

roman fashion his story starts off with a short moral fabliau:

barring his path, a Sphinx accosts him.

"Aha," says this fantastic (and not so dumb) animal, lustily

licking its lips, "what a scrumptious sandwich for my lunch! How

long ago it is I last saw such a plump and juicy human child in

my vicinity!"

"Whoa, Sphinx, whoa! Just hold on a mo!" says Aignan, who

knows his Lacan backwards. "You must first of all quiz my wits.

Your famous conundrum, you know."

"My conundrum?" says his antagonist, caught short by this

unusual invitation. "What for? You can't throw any light on its

solution. Nobody can. So stop fooling about."

But, just a tad suspicious, it adds, "Or possibly you think you

can?"

"Who knows?" says Aignan with a roguish grin.

"I must say you sound a bit of a show-off, you brattish boy,

you, but I won't hold that against you. I'm willing to play fair,

2 7

I don't mind allowing your ambition to act as a cushion to your

annihilation."

So saying, with harp in paw, it hums aloud for an instant and,

making an airy harp-string glissando, starts to sing.

Which animal do you know

That has a body as curving as a bow

And draws back inwards as straight as an arrow?

"Moi! Moi!" Aignan (no doubt a fan of Miss Piggy) shouts back

at it.

A frown furrows its horridly bulging brow.

"You think so?"

"Why, naturally," says Aignan.

"I fancy you ought to know," says his inquisitor mournfully.

For an instant nobody says a word. A cold north wind cuts a

blast through a cotton-cloud sky.

"I always said a kid would bring about my downfall," sighs a

Sphinx so dolorous it looks almost as though it's about to burst

into sobs.

"Now, now, Sphinx, no hamming it up, s'il vous plait" says

Aignan gruffly and with a faint hint of compassion for his victim

 adding, though, "You must admit, had I got it wrong, you'd

instandy claim what's owing you. I got it right, I won; and so,

by law, it's curtains for you." And, raising an intimidating hand

in front of him, adds, "So - what about taking a running jump

off that cliff?"

"Oh no," it murmurs softly, "not that, oh God, not that. . . "

"St, sir Aignan roars back, without knowing why an Italian

locution should pop into his brain at such a point of crisis and

climax.

Picking up a thick, knobby stick, Aignan knocks it down - so

hard, in fact, that it falls unconscious, spiralling downward out

of control, spinning round and round in mid-air, down, down,

down, into a profound abyss, into an aching Boschian void. A

blood-curdling wail, a wail partaking of both a lion's roar and a

2 8

cat's purr, of both a hawk's inhuman squawk and a hauntingly

human, all too human, cry of pain, throbs on and on all around

for fully thirty days . . .

With a fabliau of so obvious a moral, it's not too difficult to

intuit what kind of fiction or plot must follow. Aignan tours his

country, roaming back and forth, uphill and down again, arriving

at sundown in unfamiliar and unknown townships, proposing a

day's labour to local rustics and cartwrights and sacristans and

taking for his pay just a thin, fatty cut of bacon or a dry crust

with a scrap of garlic as its only garnish. Starvation gnaws at

him, thirst too, but nothing can kill him.

Whilst approaching his maturity, Aignan would soon know

how to adapt to almost any kind of situation confronting him,

would soon grow cool and nonchalant, fortifying his worldly

wisdom, magnifying his vision of his surroundings, his

Anschauung, and crossing paths with many curious and intriguing

individuals, all of whom would, in various ways, transform him,

by giving him a job of work to do, or board and lodging, or by

indicating a vocation to him. A con man would instruct him in

his craft; a mason would show him how to build a small but cosy

shack; a compositor would tutor him in printing a daily journal.

But that isn't all. What occurs now (as you'll find out) is a

hotchpotch of cryptic plots and complications, simulating, word

for word, action for action, its conclusion apart, that saga of

profound roots, that amusing but also moral and poignant story

that a troubadour, whom history knows as Hartmann, took for

his inspiration, and whom Thomas Mann would follow in his

turn, via a trio of short fictions.

Thus, to start with, Aignan is told that his papa was good King

Willigis (or Willo for short) and his aunt was Sibylla. Sibylla,

though, was so fond of Willigis, fond of him with a passion that

sat oddly with kinship, that sororal adoration would gradually

blossom into carnal lust (notwithstanding Willigis's faithful old

2 9

hound howling with horror and dying just as coition was about

to occur). Within 8 months and 23 days Aignan was born.

Blushing with guilt at his iniquity, hoping that castigation in

this world might guard him from damnation, Willigis (Willo for

short but not now for long) fought a holy war against Saladin

and was struck down, as was his wish, by an anonymous son of

Allah.

As for his Dauphin, Aignan, with immoral blood coursing

through his body, his mama, Sibylla, thought to abandon him

on a raft so that it might float away northwards to an insalubrious

district of filthy marshland, full of moronically drooling young

cutthroats (for adult consumption of alcohol was said to attain

as much as six gallons a month) and animals of unknown origin

but of, no doubt, voraciously carnivorous habits: talk was of a

dragon "stuffing guts wit' battalion, a' way down t' last drop o'

last man", as a charming patois had it in an inn into which many

locals would crowd for a warming drink on concluding a hard

day's work outdoors. In addition to which, it was always dark

and always drizzling - a cold, thin, stabbing, British sort of rain-

fall. Thus you wouldn't go far wrong in supposing that only

miraculous odds (I fancy a Christian would put it down to God

working in mystical ways and is probably right to do so; but

fiction has an intrinsic duty to contradict such an illusion of

propitiatory fatality; for if not, what's its point?) - in supposing,

as I say, that only miraculous odds could account for Aignan's

surviving up to and including his 18th birthday. But I mustn't

run on too quickly . . .

Anyway, on or about Aignan's 18th birthday, Sibylla, in a man-

sion fashionably got up a la brabanfon or flamand, is still doting, if now posthumously, on poor Willigis (or Willo) and turning

down all invitations to marry. A rich and rutting Burgundian

aristocrat pays court. Sibylla simply says no. "What!" says this

aristocrat in a purplish paroxysm of wrath, prior to razing half

of Hainault and marching on Cambrai.

3 0

But wait . . . At this point in my story, to Cambrai, clippity-

clop, clippity-clop, riding Sturmi, his black and bay brown

Anglo-Norman stallion, clippity-clop, clippity-clop, gallops a

knight-at-arms, with all you could ask for in youthful vigour and

good looks. Brought to Sibylla's mansion, this dazzling young

paladin charms his monarch, who commissions him to slay his

Burgundian rival. "Your wish is my command," fair Sir Adonis

says instantly, kissing his lady's hand and adding wittily, "And,

may I say, your command is actually my wish."

Mounting Sturmi, with its saffron housing and its caparison

of indigo, and illustrious in his own gold strappings inlaid with

opal, his cloak, his broad cuirass and his coat of armour, Adonis

gallops out into a sort of oblong paddock with paling all around

it. A fish adorns his standard; and a long standing ovation from

his Braban^on champions totally drowns out an irruption of scur-

rilous anti-Braban^on sloganising from a mob of Burgundian

hooligans and paid agitators.

What a bloody clash of arms it is, with onslaught following

onslaught, mortal blow confuting mortal blow, chain mail

clashing clamorously against chain mail, attacks by harpoon and

spontoon, hook and crook! In all it lasts a full day. Finally,

though, by a cunning ploy, young Adonis dismounts his rival:

victory is his.

Brabant and Burgundy mutually disarm. Joyful carillons ring

out in both lands. Floors throb to dancing, walls to playing of

hautboys, horns and drums, roofs to toasting of this artful young

paladin  now, by a logical promotion, known as Grand Admiral

of Brabant. And, complying with a royal summons, our Grand

Admiral pays an additional visit to Sibylla's mansion. Boy looks

at girl, girl looks at boy . . . imagining how it turns out is child's

play (or, should I say, adult's play).

Oh you, browsing or scanning or skimming or dipping into

my story, or actually studying it word for word, moving your

lips as you go, I must now throw light on a startling twist in its

tail, though you no doubt know without my having to inform

31

you who it is that Sturmi is carrying on its caparison - why,

that's right, it's Aignan.

Aignan, though, still blissfully ignorant of Sibylla's kinship

with him, falls into just that trap in which Oi'dipos was caught.

And Sibylla, ignorant of Aignan's analogous kinship, falls into

just that trap in which Jocasta was caught. For Sibylla admits to

an infatuation with Aignan. And Aignan admits in his turn to

an infatuation with Sibylla. And, without a filial qualm, Aignan

starts fornicating with Sibylla. And Sibylla, not surprisingly, starts

fornicating back.

Luckily or unluckily - it's hard to know which - Aignan all

too soon finds out what kind of filiation it is that links him with

Sibylla.

Sibylla, praying daily, not to say hourly, for God's pardon, has

a hospital built in which a crowd of filthy waifs and strays stay

for nothing, with not a limb, not a dirty hand or a stinking foot

or a gamily aromatic armpit, that its nursing staff will not lovingly

wash.

Aignan, donning a ragamuffin's rags, a hairshirt worn out of

mortification, with a stick in his hand, but without a vagrant's

rucksack or tin can, slips away at dusk from a mansion in which

an illusory and, alas, mortally sinful form of conjugal intimacy

lay almost within his grasp - slips far, far away, going hungry

and thirsty and living rough and tough, and pays for his infamous

conduct by asking God to vilify him, to damn him outright.

So pass four long and hard days of wayfaring, culminating in

his arrival at a poor woodman's hut. Aignan timidly knocks at

its door. In an instant its occupant is standing inquiringly in front

of him.

"Would you know," Aignan asks him, "of a Locus Solus not

far off in which, till Doomsday, God might punish my Sin

of Sins?"

"That I would, my lad, that I would," growls this doltish wood-

man (who is in fact as thick as two of his own planks). "Tis an

island, no, no, I'm wrong, 'tain't that at all, 'tis just a rock, sort

3 2

of a crag, look you, with an awful sharp drop down t' bottom

o' loch. Tis just th' spot, I'd say, for a man with drink or dam-

nation on his mind!"

"Oh woodman, do you own a boat?"

"That I do."

"And will you row it out to your island, your rock?" Aignan

asks him imploringly. "For my salvation!"

Though caught short by this proposal, his saviour concurs at

last, with a warning that Aignan will rot on such a solitary crag

- rot till his dying day.

"I wish only for God's will," says Aignan piously.

At which his rustic Charon murmurs a (slighdy incongruous)

chorus: "And so say all of us!"

So our young pilgrim sails forth to this Island of Lost Souls on

which his companion, almost throttling him, binds him to a rock

with a hangman's tight collar. A nourishing mould or humus

oozing by night out of a cavity in his rocky crucifix is his only

form of nutrition; a storm or a cutting blast or an icy south wind

or a burning simoon or a sirocco swirling about him his only roof;

a typhoon or a tidal flood his only wall; and his only clothing (for

his poor, worn, torn rags rot away as fast as crumbling old wood)

is his birthday suit, soon just as poor and worn and torn as his

rags. Not cold but glacial, not hot but roasting, Aignan stands

thus, a living symbol of contrition, a human incarnation of purga-

torial pain.

Now half-starving for want of food, now wholly fading away,

notwithstanding that mouldy humus that God in all His wisdom

and compassion has put his way, Aignan gradually grows thin,

his body physically contracts from day to day, from hour to hour,

it slims down and narrows out until unimaginably gaunt and

scrawny, until as small and insignificant as that of a dwarf, a

pygmy, a homunculus, until Aignan is nothing at last but a

shrimp of a man, a Hop-o'-my-Thumb . . .



* * *

3 3

18 springs pass. In Roman Catholicism's sanctum sanctorum Paul

VI is dying. Vatican City is in a tizzy: it must now swiftly appoint

a Paul VII and affirm papal continuity. But six polls go by - and

no Paul VII! This cardinal submits a proposal for an idiot and

that cardinal for a glutton, a third opts for a psychopath and a

fourth for an ignoramus. Corruption is rampant: anybody willing

to put down a cool million in cash can practically buy his nomina-

tion as pontiff. Things look bad. Faith is vacillating. Nobody

thinks to pray to his patron saint.

It's at this point that black clouds start forming in Abraham's

bosom, bolts of numinous lightning shoot down from on high

and Almighty God in all His wrath pays an unusual visit on a

Cardinal - unusual in that His outward form is that of a lamb,

a lamb with stigmata of blood on its flanks and a couch of fragrant

blooms to accompany it.

"O hark my words, Monsignor," God booms out at His

Cardinal. "Thou now hast that Vicar of Christ that thou sought

in vain. I, thy all-knowing King of Kings, do appoint Aignan as

My apostolic missionary  Aignan, who hast, in that corporal

nudity and purity which was My birthday gift to him, for so long

stood upright upon a rock and for just as long withstood without

flinching My tidal attacks upon him."

"O Lamb of God, O Lamb That is God, O God That is Lamb,"

His adoring Cardinal croaks, words stumbling out any old how,

"I will do as Thou commandst!"

Thus an official inquiry tracks down this Aignan who calls

God's wrath upon him with truly Christian humility (and a hint,

too, of pagan stoicism); and at long last, following many trials

and tribulations, a commission of Cardinals stands in front of that

woodman's hut from which Aignan, so long ago, was brought to

his island prison. To start with, though, its occupant is in a

slighdy noncommittal mood, mumbling:

"Aignan, y'say? No . . . don't know any Aignan. Don't know

any island. No island as I know of in this part of world."

Finally, with a tidy sum of gold coins to coax him out of his

3 4

mutism, Aignan's oarsman talks. A boat sails forth chock-a-block

with Cardinals who start laboriously climbing that rocky promon-

tory on which, through thick and thin, Aignan is living out his

martyrdom. On top of it, though, no martyr, no Aignan, nobody

at all is found (proof that Our Lord is occasionally wrong, a

notion that brings about a profound diminution of faith in His

flock) - just thin air, nothing, a void. So God, too, alas, is only

human.

Thomas Mann notwithstanding, such was my story's only con-

clusion, murmurs Anton Vowl, writing "finis" on his manuscript,

his rough draft, I should say, or synopsis, as, with his chronically

vivid imagination now running riot, Vowl simply cannot bring

his task to what you might call authorial fruition, jotting down

25 or 26 random notations, amplifying 5 or 6 crucial points,

drawing a portrait of Aignan that's both thorough and scrupu-

lously fair, ditto for Aignan's Burgundian rival ("a tall thug of a

man, with short hair and long auburn muttonchops": it's obvious

that his inspiration was his own Dr Cochin, who had brought

him back to tip-top physical condition), coining (though only in

a short paragraph) an amusing nautical-cum-Scotch patois for

that wily old bumpkin who was willing to row Aignan out to

his island limbo ("Avast an' ahoy! All aboard who's going! Oh,

but it's a braw, bricht, moonlicht nicht th'nicht, an' that's a fact!")

and portraying his and Sibylla's tragicomic imbroglio with a

touch so tactful that a Paul Morand, a Giraudoux or a Maupassant

would not disown it.

But that's as far as it got: in his diary Vowl would try to justify

his procrastination on slighdy unusual grounds. If (is his a priori

postulation) I could finish my story, I would; but if it truly had

a conclusion, would it not contain a fund of wisdom of such cold

hard purity, of such crystal clarity, that not any of us, just dipping

into it, could think to go on living? For (Vowl scrawls away) it's

a quality of fiction that it allows of only a solitary Aignan to rid

us of a Sphinx. With Aignan put out of action, no triumphant

3 5

Word will again afford us consolation. Thus (signing off) no

amount of prolix circumlocution, brilliant as it may sound, can

abolish flip-of-a-coin fortuity. But again (adding a wistful post-

script) it is our only option: all of us should know that a Sphinx

might assail us at any instant; all of us should know that, at any

instant, a word will do its utmost to thwart that Sphinx - a word,

a sound, an if or a but. For - as Zarathustra might say - no

Sphinx is living that inhabits not our human Mansion . . .

3 6

1

Which, notwithstanding a kind of McGuffin, has no

ambition to rival Hitchcock

It's on All Saints Day that Anton Vowl would first go missing

 as possibly an offshoot of his noticing, just two days prior to

this vanishing act, a most alarming story in his Figaro.

It was all about an unknown individual (a man, so rumour

had it, of such vast, almost occult authority that no journalist

had sought to crack his incognito), who had, at night, unlawfully

burst into a commissariat building that was said to contain many

important official manuscripts and got away with a particularly

hush-hush account of a major scandal implicating a trio of guards

at Poulaga Prison. Normalising such a situation was an awkward

task; convincing so diabolically crafty a burglar to hand back such

a compromising manuscript just as awkward; but it was crucial

to do so, for this kind of traitor usually has no difficulty in finding

a nation willing to buy his goods at any cost. But though it was

obvious that X . . . (for our burglar holds a high-ranking position

to this day and is, I am told, a notoriously litigious man) had

put it away out of sight in his flat, ransacking that flat again and

again had thrown up nothing significant.

Staking all on a hunch, a Commandant, Romain ("I just want

th' facts, ma'am") Didot, along with Garamond, his adjutant and

Man Friday, pays a visit to Dupin, known for his unfailing gift

for nosing things out.

"/4 priori," Didot informs him, "it's not our constabulary's job to worry about such a burglary. For anything . . . 'normal', shall

I say, in our filing library, for an x or y, nobody'd complain too 3 7

much. But this sort of McGuffin is, I'm afraid, just a tiny bit too

significant to "

"McGuffin? McGuffin?" Dupin, to whom this word's conno-

tation is a total blank, savours it in his mouth for an instant or

two.

Didot grins. "Pardon my film buff slang. Put simply, I want

you to know that solving this burglary is vital to us, in that it'll

ruin, it'll undo, what can I say, it'll play bloody havoc with our

organisation. Why, it risks cutting our working capacity by up

to 20%!"

"So," asks Dupin, "you say you shook down our burglar's flat,

high and low, with a toothcomb? Is that right?"

"Uh huh," admits an unhappy Didot, "but I can't say I found

anything incriminating. And I was as thorough as any of my

rivals from Scotland Yard!"

"Hmm," grunts Dupin. "It's as plain as daylight. You hunt

high and low, you tap walls and floors, but without any luck;

for whilst you may think that your approach is obvious, it's ironi-

cally that which is truly obvious that it can't account for. Hasn't

it struck you that your criminal had to find a hiding spot that a

big, plodding flatfoot - it's you I'm alluding to, Didot - wouldn't

think of looking at, and would probably not stash his loot away

at all but simply stick it into an ordinary blotting pad, a blotting

pad that you probably had your hand on again and again, without

knowing what it was, without caring or trying to know that

what it had on it was no casual scrawl but your own almighty

McTavish!"

"McGuffin," says Didot sulkily, still smarting from Dupin's

insults. "Anyway, I saw no such blotting pad."

"That's what you think," Dupin murmurs with ironic

suavity.

Putting on his mackintosh, taking a big black brolly out of its

stand and unlocking his front door, Dupin turns to Didot and

says, "I'm off. In a twinkling I'll hand you back that manuscript

of yours."

3 8

But  not that anybody could fault his logic - but our famous

dick was, on this particular occasion, all wrong.

"I'm PO'd, truly PO'd" (PO was a contraction of "piss off"),

sighs Dupin; who, at that point, as consolation, and allowing

Didot and his constabulary to work it all out without his aid,

starts tracking down a homicidal orang-utan with a grisly trio of

victims.

If Dupin should fail, though having it all within his grasp from

A to Z, how can I possibly look forward to my own salvation,

to my own absolution? That's what Anton Vowl jots down in

his diary - adding:

"I did so want to sink into an alcoholic coma. I did so want

to finish my days in a softly intoxicating and long dying torpor.

But, alas, I cannot avoid . . . a void! Who? What? That's for you

to find out! 'It' is a void. It's today my turn to march towards

mortality, towards that fatal hour, towards 'that good night' (as

Dylan Thomas put it), that 'undiscovYd country from which

bourn no man . . .' and so forth, towards omission and annihila-

tion. I f s a must. I'm sorry. I did so want to know. But a lancinating agony gnaws at my vitals. I can only talk now in a dry, throaty,

painfully faint hum. O my mortality, a fair ransom for such a

mad compulsion as that which has had my mind in its tight grip.

Anton Vowl."

And to that Vowl adds a postscript, a postscript which shows

him as having truly lost his mind: "I ask all 10 of you, with a

glass of whisky in your hand  and not just any whisky but a

top-notch brand  to drink to that solicitor who is so boorish as

to light up his cigar in a zoo" - adds, finally, and almost as though

initialling a last will, a trio of horizontal strips (No. 2, curiously,

isn't as long as its two companions) with an ambiguously

indistinct scrawl on top.

Was it a suicidal act? Did Vowl put an automatic to his brow?

Or slit his wrists in a warm bath? Swallow a tall glass of

3 9

aqua-toffana? Hurl his car into an abysmal chasm, a yawning pit,

abysmal till Doomsday, yawning till Doomsnight? Turn on his

flat's gas supply? Commit hara-kiri? Spray his body with napalm?

Jump off Paris's Pont du Nord by night into a flowing black

miasma?

Nobody knows, or can know, if his way of quitting this world

was wholly of his own volition; nobody in fact knows if Vowl

did quit this world at all.

But, four days on, a chum of his, who had found Anton's last

writings alarming and had thought to support him through what

was obviously a major crisis, was to knock at his flat's front door

in vain. His car was still placidly sitting in its hangar. No stains

of blood on floor or wall. No clothing, nor any trunk to carry it

in, missing.

Anton Vowl, though, was missing.

4 0

I L L U S O R Y P A R D O N S F O R ANTON Y O W L

a Japan without kimonos,

a smoking boa constrictor on a curling rink;

a flamboyant black man,

a shrill cry of nudity in a plain song,

a kindly scorpion,

10 bankrupt tycoons spitting on a stack of gold coins,

a gloating sorrow,,

a simoon in a long Finnish corridor,

a profound cotton hanky:

that's what could rid our world of Anton Vowl. . .

a hippy cardinal shouting out an anti-Catholic slogan,

a razor for citrus fruits,

a raid on a trio of British bandits by a Royal Mail train,

a straight compass,

a man's tummy-button from which a volcano spouts forth,

a land only natal by adoption,

a twilit balcony supporting a lunatic who has lost an arm,

a crucifix without a Christ,

a sisal pissing Chardonnay for magicians without cloaks;

that's what would function as a pardon for Anton Vowl. . .

a farrago without fustian,

a looking glass dull from a tiny, not spiny, fish,

autumnal grazing,

a myriad of billows rolling in from a promontory,

a faithful old hunting-gun,

4 1

a whitish burn, a body without body, a world without war,

an illusory omission,

that's what would stop Anton Vowl from dying . . .

but how to construct it all in just that instant in which is

born a Void?

4 2

1

Which, following a compilation of a polymath's random

jottings, will finish with a visit to a zoo

Anton Vowl's bosom companion is a man known as Amaury

Conson.

Conson has (or had) six sons. His firstborn, Aignan (odd,

that), did a vanishing act similar to Vowl's almost 30 springs

ago, in Oxford, during a symposium run by a soi-disant Martial

Cantaral Foundation and in which Lord Gadsby V. Wright,

Britain's most illustrious scholar and savant, was a participant.

Conson's following son, Adam, was to pass away in a sanatorium,

succumbing to inanition through wilful auto-starvation. And that

was only to start with: in Zanzibar a monstrous shark would

swallow Ivan, his third; in Milan his fourth, Odilon, Luchino

Visconti's right-hand man at La Scala, had a particularly bony

portion of turbot catch in his throat; and in Honolulu his fifth,

Urbain, was a victim of hirudination, slain by a gigantic worm

sucking his blood, totally draining him, so that as many as 20

transfusions would fail to bring him back. So Conson has a soli-

tary surviving son, Yvon; but his liking for Yvon is gradually

diminishing, as Yvon, living so far away, now hardly visits his

poor old dad.

Conson ransacks Anton Vowl's flat from top to bottom; calls on

that Samaritan living two doors down who informs him about

Cochin ablating Vowl's sinus; and asks anybody who might assist

him in tracking down his companion.

Vowl's flat is in a most unpromising sort of building, wholly

4 4

without "standing": walls in a whitish stucco; filthy, poor-quality

cotton rugs losing tufts of dank hair on an almost daily basis; a

narrow drawing room; an untidy living room with a mouldy sofa

josding a cupboard that has a rancid oniony stink about it and

a trio of horribly kitschy prints stuck on to its shaky doors with

a Band-Aid; a bow window of milky-murky glass giving off a

dark and turbid glow, a pallid photocopy of sunlight; a monkish

cot to doss down on with torn pillows and a quilt full of scummy

stains; and a dingy lavatory-cum-washroom with a jug, a pot, a

bowl, a razor and a washcloth hanging all in rags, off which

a tiny stowaway of an animal, a moth but just possibly a rat, had

got fat.

Cautiously lifting down, from a flagrandy DIY-built rack, a

stack of dusty old books with grubby bindings and torn stitchings

and a lot of rambling, criss-crossing annotations and marginalia,

Amaury is drawn to 5 or 6 works that Vowl was obviously study-

ing with a particular goal in mind: Gombrich's Art and Illusion,

Witold Gombrowicz's Cosmos, Monica Wittig's L'Opoponax,

Thomas Mann's Doctor Faustus, Noam Chomsky, Roman

Jakobson and, finally, Louis Aragon's Blanc ou I'Oubli.

Now Conson starts rummaging about a bulky cardboard box

and finds a host of manuscripts proving to his satisfaction that

his companion was thirsty for instruction, for Vowl, who was

always an anal, finicky sort of chap, hadn't thrown out anything

dating from his schooldays. Studying it rapdy, practically word

by word, Amaury could thus follow from its halting origins all

of what you might call Anton's curriculum studiorum.

First, composition:

Ld ou nous virions jadis, il n'y avait ni autos, ni taxis, ni

autobus; nous allions parfois, mon cousin m'accompagnait,

voir Linda qui habit ait dans un canton voisin. Mais, n'ay ant

pas d'auto, il nous fallait courir tout au long du parcours;

sinon nous arrivions trop tard: Linda avait disparu.

4 5

Unjour vint pourtant ou Linda partitpour toujours. Nous

aurions du la bannir a jamais; mais voild, nous Vaimions.

Nous aimions tant son parfum, son air rayonnant, son blou-

son, son pantalon brun trop long; nous aimions tout.

Mais voild, tout finit: trois ans plus tard, Linda mourut;

nous I'avons appris par basard, un soir, au cours d'un lunch.

Now philosophy:

Kant, analysing a priori intuition, had for an instant a

nagging doubt about his Cogito ("I think, thus L am") and

its validity, knowing that it would fail to account for a situ-

ation in which God, musing on His own primacy in that

Trinity on which Christianity was built, might boast (but to

whom?) of constituting a holistic, all-including "I". "And

so," said Kant, "Spinoza thought to accomplish a mutation

that would abolish all godhood? Judaising Baruch? Bandag-

ing 'Natural suturing it (or, should I say, saturating it),

closing up its gaps, by a Siv with aspirations to Infinity!"

Thus, a Platonician by anticipation, but fallaciously so, Kant

saw Spinoza as part of a long tradition of castrating cosmolo-

gists. For, many moons prior to that, Plato, killing off all

archaists, saw that no participant having his origin in that

cosmic "I" could bring it to a concision.

That aboriginal Arc thus found its triangulation, drawing

out its diagonal to its sinusoidal tip, casting a sharp point at

Kant's brow, causing him to pass away from having thought

for an instant of a Cogito without a God.

Maths:

On Groups.

(By Marshall Hall Jr LIT 28, folios 5 to 18 inclus.)

Who first had this particular notion, who brought it to its

maturity, who found a solution to it? Was it Gauss or Galois?

Nobody could say. Nowadays, though, all of us know. But it's

said that, just prior to dying, at night, at about 4 or 5 a.m.,

4 6

Galois put in writing on his jotting pad (Marshall Hall Jr,

op. cit, folio B) a long, continuous chain of factors in his own

form of notation. To wit:

aa -1 = bb - 1 = cc - 1 = dd - 1 = f f - 1 =

gg  1 = hh  1 = ii  1 = jj  1 = kk  1 =

U  1 = mm  l = nn  1 = oo  l=pp  1 =

qq  1 = rr  1 = ss  1 = tt  1 = uu  1 =

w  1 = ww  1 = xx  1 = yy  1 = zz  1 =

As part of his manuscript is missing, though, nobody knows

to this play what conclusion Galois was hoping to draw from

his calculations.

Cantor, Douady andBourbaki thought, on many and vari-

ous grounds (from algorithms to topoi, from Mobius strips to

C-star, from Shih's K-functor to Thorn's Qf, and including all

sorts of distributions, involutions, convolutions, Schwartz, Koszul,

Carton and Giorgiutti) of following a hunch that would sur-

mount such an abrupt hiatus. It was, alas, all in vain.

Though it took him from 1935 to 1955, working at it

virtually nonstop, Pontryagin finally had to admit to accom-

plishing nothing.

Just 8 months ago, though, Kan, working on his own

adjoint (cit, D. Kan Adjoint Functors Transactions, V, 3,

18) could, it was said, show by induction (his calculation -

so Kan told Jaulin - had a major cardinal as its basis) this

proposition: G or H or K (H a G, G K), 3 magmas

(following Kurosh) in which a(bc) - (ab)c; in which, if a is

a constant, x > xa, x > ax do not "vary", so that G ~ H

x K, ifG = H\JK; ifH is as invariant as K; ifH has

with K a solitary unit in common H fl K = Alas! as Kan

quit this world prior to bringing his work to fruition, a sol-

ution is not jbrthcoming.

Pastoral:

It is a story about a small town. It is not a gossipy yarn; nor

is it a dry, monotonous account, full of such customary

4 7

"fill-ins" as "romantic moonlight casting murky shadows

down a long, winding country road". Nor will it say anything

about tinkling, lulling, distant folds, robins carolling at twi-

light or any "warm glow oflamplightf'from a cabin window.

No...

Continuing his inquiry, Amaury Conson also finds out that

Anton Vowl had a fascination with aboriginal customs:

In Gogni (Chad) a Sokoro, clad in his traditional tunic, a

tunic as long as a raglan coat such as a snobbishly insular

Parisian might sport whilst on safari, paid a visit to a son

of his who was living in Mokulu as a willing victim of

an unusual (and, until now, unknown) marital status con-

stituting a paradoxical - or, as anthropologists say, "uxori-

local" - form of subjugation. It was no doubt wrong of him

to jurnish a youth to such mountain folk (or Diongors),

thus forcing him out of his own tribal circuit, with its basic,

lucid, rigorous - in a word, structural - warp and woof of

articulation.

Sun or Margina, Uti or Kaakil, Longai or Zori - O

almighty rain gods, grant us comfort in our sorrow. What I

now pray for is oblivion, that soft, cradling balm of oblivion,

for my solitary misdoing. If not, would you slay a man for

simply, unmindfully, ignoring his duty?

Finally, avoiding both Scylla and Charybdis, our Sokoro

saw a witch doctor who told him that what would pacify his

Sun was sacrificing a goat kid - and, as an additional victim,

a black cock, so as to find grain for a rainy day.

Zoology:

Ovibus, or musk-ox: an animal, half-lamb and half-bullock.

Its natural habitat is that snowbound Arctic or Russian plain

that is commonly known as a "tundra". Its skin, which turns

soft if you pound it, has a sharp and piquantly liquorish

flavour. To catch hold of such an animal, you must fix upon

4 8

what you think is a propitious occasion, lying flat out as it

runs towards you and pouncing on it just as its front hoof

looms up in front of you, monstrous and intimidating.

As soon as you put your hands on its throat, surrounding

it, it looks up at you, starts lowing and, in its turn, squats

along by you and actually nods off.

At which point you will find that its body, with its aroma

of acacia, alfa, alfilaria, onion, oxalis, origanum, upas and

union, is oddly soft to your touch.

Urus, or aurochs: a wild ox living in our own country

and not found in any zoo. I f s said, though, that you may

occasionally find, on a nocturnal trot, a urus casting its

hunchback shadow. Not so: its back has no hump at all. Nor

has it any dip. In fact, it's just a boringly normal sort of back.

So why should anybody hold forth on a urus ?

Social conflicts:

3 May 1968. "Agitation on Boul'Mich", so would claim a

Figaro photo-caption. Slavishly carrying out his boss's com-

mand, an adjutant had a battalion of cops attack a crowd

of anarchists, communists and sundry radicals who, wanting

only what was right and just, sought total and unconditional

pardon for six companions rotting in jail. A giant slab of

paving brought from a courtyard was thrown at a Black

Maria crawling with vicious gun-toting gorillas. A mound

of paving bricks was soon built up in front of it; and a wiry

old poplar, its thick trunk sawn in half, lay diagonally across

a chaotic, haphazard mass of burning cars. Worrying that

this situation was about to turn against him, Grimaud

did not balk at imposing a pogrom, and his thuggish

minions would thrash, gas and harass many a half-moribund

agitator.

But public opinion wasn't for long in his favour. A crowd

a million strong took Paris by storm, brandishing black flags

and crimson flags and shouting out anti-dictatorial slogans:

4 9

"Down with Gaullism!', 'Charly is not our Darling!" and

CRS - ssr.

Grouping Parts's population according to job classification,

a union got all work to stop, all production to shut down, and

had sit-ins in public transport, coal basins, shops, workshops,

schools, mills and dockyards. Gas-stations would soon start to

go short. . .

And Sarrish patois:

Man sagt dir, komm doch mal ins Landhaus. Man sagt dir,

Stadtvolk muss aufi Land, muss zuriick zur Natur. Man

sagt dir, komm bald, moglichtst am Sonntag. Du brummst

also los, nicht zu frith am Tag, das will man nicht. Am

Nachmittag fdhrst du durchs Dorf, in Richtung Sportplatz.

Vorm Sportplatz fdhrst du ab. Kurz darauf bist du da. Du

hoist am Tor, durch das du nicht hindurchkannst, parkst das

Auto und blickst dich um. Du glaubst, nun taucht vor dir

das Haus auf, doch du irrst dich, da ist das Dach. Ringsum

Wald, dickichtartig, Wildnis fast. Wold, wohin du schaust.

Baum und Strauch sind stark im Wuchs. Am Pfad wachst

Minzkraut auch Gras, frisch, saftig und griin. Ins Haus,

wovon du nur das Dach sahst. Du traumst, doss das Haus,

wovon du nur das Dach sahst, laubumrankt, gross und mcich-

tig ist. Mit Komfort natiirlich, Klo und Bad und Bild im

Flur. Dazu Mann und Frau stoltz vorm Kamin. Traumst

du, doch das Tor ist zu und ins Haus, wovon du nur das

Dach sahst, kannst du nicht. Nachts, auch das traumst du

noch, loscht man das Licht und danngliiht rot und idyllisch

das Holz im Kamin. So traumst du vor dich hin, doch man

macht das Tor nicht auf, obwohl Sonntag ist. Da sagt man

dir also, komm doch mal ins Landhaus und dann kommst

du wirklich zum Landhaus und bist vorm Landhaus und

kommst doch nicht ins Landhaus und warst umsonst am

Landhaus und fdhrst vom Landhaus aus zuriick nach

Haus. . .

5 0

At long last, on top of a writing pad of an ochrous gold similar

to that of artificial chamois, Amaury Conson finds Anton Vowl's

diary; unclasps it; sifts through it till night falls; and thoughtfully

shuts it again. It's dark out. Conson hails a passing cab - "To

our local commissariat, pronto" - and, worn out by his day's

probing, flops down on its baggy back cushion.

Waiting for hours in this commissariat, having to hang about

until past midnight, maniacally twiddling his thumbs, Conson

slowly starts going crazy. Finally, a dispiritingly doltish-looking

individual sits down in front of him, biting on, occasionally just

sucking on, with a horrid slurping sound, a gigantic ham sand-

wich, washing it down with a low-quality Pinot blanc drunk out

of a plastic cup and, whilst so doing, casually drawing blobs of

moist wax from his auditory canal with a toothpick and scouring

his flat, simian nostrils with his thumbs.

"Now now," says this typically stolid cop, through a mouthful

of York ham, "what I think is this. Your pal vows to blow his brains

out, and did blow his brains out. So that's that, isn't it? If not, why

would anybody say such a thing? Am I right or am I right?"

Amaury stubbornly sticks to his guns. "But, you idiot, I saw

his diary, I saw his flat! In addition to which, Anton did not vow

to blow his brains out, it was imagining his brains blown out by

an assassin that was making him shit his pants. You won't find

his body, you know! It's a kidnapping, an abduction!"

"An abduction? So your . . . hunch, shall I say," (this said with

an infuriatingly ironic smirk on his ugly mug) "is that it was an

abduction? But why, pray? This isn't Chicago, you know . . ."

Conson, at a loss for words, aghast at such crass buck-passing,

at last thinks to ring up a cousin of his, a Quai d'Orsay official,

who in his turn consults with an admiral who has a word with a

commandant who upbraids Conson's sandwich-munching ironist

and pulls strings to put a cop at his disposal, a Corsican, Ottavio

Ottaviani.



* * *

51

So Amaury calls on Ottaviani (who inhabits a top-floor maid's

room in a dingy block of flats adjoining a subway station,

Sablons, not far from Paris's Jardin d'Acclimatation) and finds

him, a fat, slobbish layabout, rocking to and fro in a rococo

rocking chair, lolling back on a cushion of soft kapok quilting

around which loops a braid as snakily sinuous as that on a hussar's

uniform, dunking a rollmop in a big bowl of dills and swallowing

it with a noisy smacking of his lips.

"All right," says this Ottaviani with a burp, "I was put at your

disposal. So what's it all about?"

"Just this," says Amaury: "Anton Vowl is missing. About 3

days ago I had a postcard from him announcing his flight. In my

opinion, though, it's actually a kidnapping."

"Why a kidnapping?" asks a civil but doubtful Ottaviani.

"Anton Vowl was on to. . ." murmurs Amaury in ominous

fashion.

"On to what?"

"Nobody knows what. . ."

"So?"

"In his diary I found 5 or 6 odd hints that you and I ought

to follow up. In it, notably, Vowl claims both to know and not

know; or, should I say, not know but also know . . ."

"If you want my opinion, this is all a bit of a - "

"His postcard," says Amaury, unflinching, "had a curious post-

script. It said: 'I ask all 10 of you, with a glass of whisky in your

hand - and not just any whisky but a top-notch brand - to drink

to that solicitor who is so boorish as to light up his cigar in a

zoo.' By that it was plainly his wish to tip us off and, in my

opinion, you and I should look into it and also study his diary,

which, mark my words, contains a lot of important

information . . ."

"Uh huh," says Ottaviani, though with a total lack of convic-

tion. "This affair is proving a tough nut to crack."

"First of all," submits Conson, ignoring his doubts, "you and

I might go for a stroll around a zoo."

5 2

"A zoo?" Our Corsican's jaw drops. "Why go to a zoo with a

Jardin d'Acclimatation just fifty yards away?"

"Think, Ottaviani! That solicitor so boorish as to light up his

cigar in a zoo'!"

"Okay, okay," says Ottaviani with a compliant sigh, "you go

to a zoo and I'll ask around at a handful of hospitals to find out

if anybody has brought him in."

"Good thinking," says Amaury. "I'll join up with you tonight

to discuss our findings. Midnight at Maxim's, what do you say?"

"Lipp isn't as pricy."

"Right. Lipp it is."

Thus Amaury trots off to Paris's world-famous zoo, photo-

graphs a Sahara lion and cautiously hands a candy bar to a chimp

that has thrown a twig at him. Pumas, cougars, stags, muskrats

and mountain goats. A lynx. A yak. And, without warning:

"You! Lord, what a small world it is!"

It's Olga, a distant cousin of a Canadian consul in Frankfurt,

and a woman who has always had a passion for Anton.

Olga starts crying. "Oh, Amaury, darling Amaury, do you

think Anton is . . . is . . . "

"No, Olga, I don't. Missing, I'm afraid so. But not .. . no,

no, not that."

"Did you also obtain a postcard from him advising you of his

going away for good?"

"I did. And didjyowr postcard also contain a PS about a solicitor

smoking in a zoo?"

'That's right. But you won't find any solicitor in this zoo."

"Who can say?" murmurs Amaury.

And, in fact, at that point, as if by magic, standing not far from

a pool simulating, with uncanny naturalism, a mini-Kamchatka, a

pool in which a host of birds, fish and mammals play as happily

as infants in a sandpit - frogs, squids, cormorants, basilisks,

dolphins, finbacks, cachalots, blackfish, lizards, dugongs and

narwhals - Amaury spots, and naturally accosts, a man just about

to light a cigar.

5 3

"Good morning," says this individual.

"Morning. Now, my good man,' Amaury asks him straight

out, 'do you know of any solicitors in this zoo?"

"I do. I am such a solicitor." (This is said with blunt, oddly

disarming candour.)

"Shhh," says Amaury, "not so loud. And did you know Anton

Vowl?"

"I got him to do occasional odd jobs."

"Do you think Vowl is still living?"

"Who knows?"

"And you? I didn't catch your . . ."

"Hassan Ibn Abbou, High Court Solicitor, 28 Quai Branly,

Alma 18-23."

"Did Anton also mail you a puzzling postcard similar to that

which both of us got prior to his vanishing?" Amaury pompously

asks him.

"I did."

"And do you know what its closing words signify?"

"I didn't at first. But now I think that Anton was making an

allusion to yours truly by writing about a cigar-smoking solicitor.

Which is why I instandy took a taxi to this zoo. As for his tots

of whisky, I had no notion of what it was all about until noticing

this morning in my Figaro that Longchamp's Grand Prix is just

3 days off."

"I don't follow."

"You will! For it has a trio of odds-on nominations: Scribouil-

lard III, Whisky 10 and Capharnaiim."

"So your hunch is that Anton was subtly hinting at this Grand

Prix?" says Olga, who, until that point, hadn't said a word.

Amaury cuts in. "Who can say? It's an indication worth follow-

ing up, though. You, Hassan and I will go to Longchamp this

coming Monday."

"Talking of which," says Hassan, "I got from Anton Vowl,

a month or so ago, 26 cartons containing all his labours, all

that hard, cryptic work that Vowl was carrying out in his flat. I

5 4

know of no surviving kinfolk of his who can claim familial,

suppositional, optional or subsidiary rights to this voluminous

body of work. So I think it normal that you hold it in trust,

particularly as it might contain all sorts of hints vital to our

inquiry."

"How soon can Olga and I study it?"

"Not until Monday, I'm afraid, as I'm just about to go off to

Aillant-sur-Tholon. But I'm coming back on Monday morning

and I'll contact you both. At that point you should know what

Anton Vowl was trying to say in his allusion to 'a glass of

whisky'."

Amaury laughs. "I'm willing to go as far as to put 10 francs

on that nag."

"So am I," adds Olga.

"Good," says Hassan, consulting his watch. "Gracious, I must

run! My train's at 4.50. So long! Till Monday night!"

"God go with you," murmurs Olga piously.

"Ciao," says Amaury.

Striding away, Hassan is soon out of sight. With Olga follow-

ing him, Amaury idly strolls from animal to animal; but, finding

nothing of any import, asks Olga out to a charming lunch.

Whilst Amaury is at Paris's zoo, Ottavio Ottaviani is paying a

visit to its hospitals, Broca, Foch, Saint-Louis and Rothschild;

and inquiring in many of its commissariats. Nobody has any

information for him about Anton Vowl.

At midnight, though, hurrying on towards Lipp, at that busy

Vavin-Raspail roundabout, who should our Corsican run into

but Amaury, who quickly grasps his arm and mouths at him in

a vivid dumb-show, "Don't go in, Lipp is simply crawling with

cops!"

"Not too far off," says Ottaviani, who occasionally had a habit

of confiding information not normally for public consumption,

"not too far off is an individual whom this country's top brass

want, shall I say . . . to go missing."

5 5

"Missing?" Amaury, thinking to catch a whiff of his quarry,

practically jumps out of his skin.

"Damn it!" says Ottaviani, cursing his stupidity at passing on

such hush-hush information to a layman.

"Now, now, Ottaviani, out with it! Vowl is also missing!"

"This affair has nothing to do with him," affirms Ottaviani.

"How do you know?" says Amaury, adding, with an authority

that allows no pussyfooting on Ottaviani's part, "Who is this

individual?"

"A Moroccan," admits Ottaviani.

"A Moroccan!" shouts Amaury.

"Shhh," murmurs Ottaviani, looking around anxiously. 'That's

right, a Moroccan. A Moroccan solicitor . . . "

"Hassan Ibn Abbou!" Amaury proclaims in triumph.

5 6

1

In which an unknown individual has it in for

Moroccan solicitors

"No," says Ottaviani with his usual sang-froid, "it isn't Ibn Abbou

but Ibn Barka."

"Oh, thank God, that's a load off my mind," says Amaury with

a sigh, afraid, without knowing why, first for Hassan Ibn Abbou,

and, a fortiori, if almost subliminally, for his own skin. For if

Anton Vowl falls victim to an abductor (or abductors), who's to

say that this abductor (or abductors) won't now try to lay a hand

on his faithful companions, Olga, Hassan and so forth?

Conson, with Ottaviani dogging him, walks off to Harry's Bar,

sits down (in a dark ill-lit booth so as to avoid gossip), signals

to a barman and asks for a whisky, a Chivas, straight. Ottaviani's

fancy is for a Baron but without any thick, sudsy collar of froth

on top. Munich or stout? Our Corsican hums and haws for an

instant, saying at last "Oh, Munich'll do," simply as a way of

dismissing a barman who visibly cannot wait to chat up a pair

of young girls in an adjoining booth and is sarcastically, not to

say "smart-asstically", humming "Why am I waiting?".

Without choosing to go into all its various ins and outs,

Ottaviani sums up what was most scandalous about Ibn Barka's

kidnapping. It was a total cock-up from start to finish. Paris-Soir,

a right-wing rag that was normally of a rampantly colonialist

bias, sought to stir things up by publishing a lot of juicy, malici-

ous rumours. Public indignation was at boiling point. Diplomats

would go to ground, politicians usually avid for publicity would

5 7

abruptly drop out of sight. Papon took an oath that it had noth-

ing to do with him. Souchon, though, at last had to own up to

it, as did Voitot. All Matignon took fright at a diary by Figon

incriminating a high-court dignitary, which was finally, if not

without difficulty, shown up as a fabrication. Oufkir had an alibi

- if you could call so ridiculous a story an alibi! Nor, following

Fugon's hara-kiri a la Mishima (in fact, so rumour had it, this

was not a totally voluntary affair, for, calmly placing a sword in

front of him, and saying only, in an odd transatlantic twang, that

"a man's gotta do what a man's gotta do", his boss at Matignon

had no doubt in his mind what would occur)  nor, I say, did

any inquiry gain much ground. With an accumulation of damning

data, opposition politicians saw an opportunity of indicting a

form of tyranny guilty of an act so arrandy criminal as to go as

far as confiscating a tract that sought to point up a shadowy

conspiracy linking this abduction of Ibn Barka with that, six

months prior to it, of Argoud in Zurich. Talk was of a contract

going out to a commando of informants, outcasts of all kinds,

all of whom had criminal pasts as long as your arm (mosdy bank

jobs) and who had also had payoffs from Matignon for having

brought off 5 or 6 political "liquidations": an antagonist of Bour-

guiba shot down in Frankfurt, ditto an African militant in Saint-

Moritz, Yazid in Louvain, Gabon's consul in Madrid! So, to

maintain in his position a cowardly tyrant, his waning authority

totally, and notoriously, in pawn to a major Parisian bank (Capi-

tal Fran^ais), Foccard had a rag-tag-and-bobtail gang of thugs,

good-for-nothings, gold, contraband and drugs Mafiosi, join up

with his battalion of bullyboys, all working hand in hand! It was

a squalid affair all right. Discussions would go on out of sight

in smoky back rooms. Though any small fry not up to scratch, any

moron placing his organisation at risk, was instandy (in gangland

lingo) "put out of harm's way", nothing and nobody could touch

its instigators, its VIPs, its "big boys" . . .

"Ho hum," murmurs Ottaviani, gulping down his Munich and

wiping its froth from his lips. 'Talk of a can of worms . . ."

5 8

It's his last word. Amaury sighs and, though Anton Vowl's

abduction has at first sight nothing at all to do with Ibn Barka's,

informs Ottaviani of visiting a zoo, running into Olga, and

Hassan Ibn Abbou, who was also trying to find his companion.

"Aha!" laughs Ottaviani. "So Vowl had a champion you didn't

know about!"

"Why . . . that's right," says Amaury, curious as to why Ottavi-

ani thought that important. Continuing, though: "Now look at

what you and I know. This morning I saw Hassan Ibn Abbou

in a zoo. But what was it that Anton Vowl said: 'A solicitor who

lights up his cigar in a zoo". So I rush off to this city's only zoo.

And what do I find? A solicitor lighting up a cigar. All right.

But what if said solicitor thought to turn up at said zoo and light

said cigar simply to conform to Anton's portrait of him, hoping

by so doing that Olga or I would contact him?"

"So," Ottaviani succincdy sums up, "it was possibly not for-

tuitous?"

"Fortuitous or calculating, who can say? But what I plan to

find out on Monday is what, if anything, was significant about

Anton's allusion to 10 tots of whisky. First, though, it's worth

studying a factor that's not as crucial but still apropos. To wit:

do you know Karamazov?"

"Dmitri of Karamazov Bros Inc. ?"

"No, his cousin Arnaud, who runs a taxi out of Clignancourt

and who would occasionally do odd jobs for Vowl. You could

find out for us if this Karamazov also knows of Anton's kid-

napping. Do that on Monday morning, will you, whilst I'm at

Longchamp."

"Just as you say, boss," grunts Ottaviani, snoozing into his

glass.

It's suffocatingly cold. So cold, in fact, no duck would think of

putting a foot outdoors, nor would a chimp (with brass balls or

not). But Ottavio Ottaviani is robustly striding along, as though

that night's thick, damp fog simply hasn't got through to him.

5 9

Arriving at Alma, Ottaviani mounts a bus that drops him at

Paris's famous Quai d'Orsay, stops an instant to catch his wind

and consult his watch. It's 11.40. Longchamp is still a long way

off.

"Off I go," says Ottaviani, mumbling inaudibly to nobody in

particular.

Not far from Orsay, only yards away from Iran's consular build-

ing, is a small snack bar with which our Corsican is familiar from

having had an occasional ham or salami sandwich in it. Ottaviani

walks in, dusty, haggard, worn out. A crowd of individuals is

propping up its bar.

"Ciao," says Ottaviani.

"Hullo, hullo," says Romuald, a barman who, though always

at work, is always smiling: "ain't a fit night out for man nor

animal."

"You can say that again," murmurs Ottaviani, vigorously blow-

ing into his hands. "Brrrr . . ."

"Only minus two, though," Romuald points out. "Not as cold

as all that."

"P'raps so, but it's blowing up a fair old storm," says Ottaviani.

"Can I bring you a sandwich? Parma ham, York ham, Italian

salami, Danish salami, bacon, black pudding, chipolata, cold

roast, tuna fish, Stilton, Cantal, Port-Salut, Gorgonzola? Or what

about a hot dog?"

"No thanks. A grog's all I want. I think I'm catching a cold."

"A grog for M. Ottaviani!" Romuald calls back to his assistant

who is busy cooking a plat du jour of osso bucco with artichauts

au romarin.

"Coming up!"

In an instant Ottaviani's drink plops down in front of him.

"A boiling hot grog," proclaims Romuald. "No cold can with-

stand it."

Ottaviani sips his grog.

"Mmmm, yummy."

"Not too sugary?"

6 0

"No, it's just right. Fit for a king."

'That's 23 francs 20 all told."

Ottaviani throws down a handful of coins, for which Romuald

thanks him.

Noticing, half out of sight, his boss, Aloysius Swann, idly

picking at a bowl of fruit, Ottaviani, cautiously balancing his

grog in his hand, thrusts his way through a crowd of drunks and,

still panting, sits down facing him.

"Hullo, boss."

"Hullo, Ottaviani," says Swann. "You okay?"

"Just so-so. I'm coming down with a cold."

"You want a yoghurt?"

"No, I'm not at all hungry."

"So?"

"So what?"

"Amaury Conson?"

"Conson still thinks it was a kidnapping."

"Sounds as if that's what it was," murmurs Swann.

"You think so too, but why?"

Without saying a word, Swann pulls a photocopy from his bag

and hands it to his adjutant.

"Good Lord!" Ottaviani almost shouts, "this is straight from

GHQ!"

And this is what it said:

Analysis of Consul Alain Gu. rin

to Royal G - P.R.C.

(Distribution S A C L A N T - "cosmic"

N A T O - S AG - G/PRC - 3.28.23)

A month ago an analysis from Orrouy's GHQ-NATO Comman-

dant, with corroboration from HCI Andilly, which midshipman

3/6.26 of Cp. Horn's straggling group thought to pass on to us

for confirmation, told us what was about to occur to Anton

6 1

Vowl. That month's K. Count was instantly put in by Mission

"NATO-cosmic" 5/28-Z.5. Anton Vowl was not on it. In

addition, an anti-abduction plan, joindy drawn up by Mission

"off days" 8/28-Z.5, instruction L 18, and by "cosmic 1A", was

soon circulating to all GRCs, SR assistants, SM assistants, HCIs,

ONIs, CICs, "G.3"s, BNDs, SIDs and "Prima 2"s - all, that is,

saving MI5, but including stimuli to various unorthodox com-

mando units.

Without wishing to imply that this information, of an A. 3 or

B.I rating, is not crucial, it is worth noting that, 18 days ago,

our organisation got virtually nothing out of placing all its

apparatus at point "3". Why was it such a thorough fiasco? HCI

Arlington claims to know: CIA infiltrations? but also SIS in our

staffs within NATO jurisdiction. It is said, in addition, that, by

compromising a soi-disant Bushy Man from Ankara, an Albanian

SR assistant had sought (and not, as it turns out, in vain) to gain

total control of his group.

Thus, to sum up this difficult situation, our organisation may

opt for (a) abandoning Anton Vowl to his doom or (b) instigat-

ing a casus - not a casus violationis, at most a casus damni: in my opinion, only our PM could find a solution to such an unusual

affair. Which is why I submit this analysis (in flagrant violation

of SR norms), advising you against consultation but in favour

of a global opinion plus instructions.

"God, it's got so many ramifications!" says Swann. "What did

Hassan Ibn Abbou say?"

"Oh, Hassan wasn't talking, but I'm going to confront him

tonight at midnight; with a bit of luck I might just find out

what's what. As for Olga, softly, softly. That's a young lady who

knows a lot but isn't giving too much of it away."

"You think so?"

"I know so. Talking of which, I saw Karamazov."

"And?"

6 2

"Karamazov saw Vowl on 3 occasions a month ago: (1) taking

him, by night, to a vacant, run-down bungalow in Aulnay-sous-

Bois; (2) by day, to play whist at Augustin Lippmann's club

(Karamazov won about 20 points off Vowl); and (3), most sig-

nificandy, just 20 days ago, Vowl had Karamazov fit an anti-

burglary contraption to his, that's to say to Vowl's, Fiat."

"Vowl had him fit an anti-burglary contraption to his

Fiat?"

"Yup."

"You don't say! But why?"

Ottaviani has simply no notion why and is hoping that Swann,

who has, it's said, a flair for a hunch worthy of a Sioux or an

Iroquois, will furnish him with a motivation. His boss, though,

lacking that crucial spark of inspiration, is not on form today.

"Why fit an anti-burglar}' contraption to his car?" murmurs

Swann, adding grumpily, "And to think that you and I at first

thought this affair was a cinch . . ."

A mutual sigh.

"It's all a ghasdy hotchpotch, particularly as I still don't know

who is hiding Anton Vowl."

With his hand Swann signals to Romuald, who says to him:

"A mocha? A cappuccino?"

"Thanks but no thanks. Just my bill, if you wouldn't mind."

"Righty-ho, I'll tot it up for you in a jiffy."

Scribbling on his pad with a Bic, Romuald murmurs:

"Tuna, plat du jour, Stilton, fruit, drink . . . that's 18 francs,

including tip."

"18 francs!" complains Swann. "Isn't that a bit stiff for what

I had?"

Romuald puts it down to VAT, whilst, for his part, Aloysius

actually calls him a crook. It all risks coming to fisticuffs, but

Ottaviani finally calms Swann, who, furious but compliant, if still

not brought round to Romuald's way of thinking, pays up.

On his way out, though, Swann is caught in a draught, dis-

charging a sonorous "Atishoooo!"

6 3

"Don't go looking for sympathy!" laughs a now jovial Romu-

ald. "You had that coming to you. What a lark - catching your

pal's cold!"

Vigorously shaking hands with Aloysius Swann, who has to rush

off to his commissariat, Ottavio Ottaviani hails a taxi to go to

Longchamp, which today, and Paris's ominous political situation

notwithstanding, holds its annual Grand Prix du Touring-Club,

an arduous handicap that will award its victor with not just a

gold trophy but a million francs, or so it's said, a donation from

a racing-mad nabob. And, with tout-Paris jostiing Paris tout, all

go parading through Longchamp's lavish paddocks.

Most conspicuous by far is Italy's top film star, Amanda von

Comodoro-Rivadavia, soon to fly out to Hollywood to sign a

six-million-dollar contract with Francis Ford Coppola for a tril-

ogy of Mafia dramas with Marlon Brando and A1 Pacino. Vol-

uptuous Amanda is clad (o sancta simplicitas) in a pair of bouffant

pink slacks as billowy as a Turkish Ottoman's, a coral polo shirt,

a bright crimson cardigan, an ivory sash, a maroon scarf, a shock-

ing pink mink coat, ruby stockings, a damask muff and purplish

bootikins. Accompanying this lurid apparition is Urbain d'Agos-

tino (inamorato or simply sugar daddy, who knows?), sporting

a lacy jabot, an Ungaro tail coat with a Mao collar, a top hat and

an ambassadorial gold chain. And milling around, with much

aristocratic ado, is a host of Maharajahs and moguls, Kronprinz,

Paladins and Hospodars, pillars all of Who's Who.

Grooms, spivs and turf officials stroll to and fro; at a kiosk a

young lad is shouting "Paris-Turf. Git your Paris-Turf. "; touts offload dubious dps and long columns start forming in front of

casinos and gambling halls.

Having sought him high and low among this cosmopolitan

crowd, Ottaviani at last finds Amaury Conson sitting on a stair-

way with Olga, a vision of Pariso-colonial chic in a viridian Arab

tunic.

Through a pair of binoculars, Amaury is scrutinising Long-

6 4

champ's world-famous track lap by lap, practically inch by inch:

"I think that ground is just a bit too soft."

A boorish individual standing at his right affirms (though, in

truth, nobody had sought his opinion) that Conson is a total

ignoramus on track sports. Amaury starts blushing furiously but

backs off from, so to say, standing his own ground. And, in

actual fact, Longchamp had not known a track so icy and of such

volatility: no rainfall for a month or so, no mist hanging about,

but a hard, nippy frost all around.

"Why hasn't Whisky 10 shown up?" asks Olga, squinting

through Amaury's binoculars.

"It's dropping out. It was just this instant broadcast on a

Tannoy."

"Why?"

"Nobody knows."

"So why stay on?" murmurs a thoroughly downcast Ottaviani.

"Olga wants to know how it turns out."

"You said it!" laughs Olga. "I put 25 francs on Scribouillard."

Out of 26 original nominations, only 25 now stand at Long-

champ's starting-post, Whisky 10 (No. 5) having withdrawn.

Initially, Whisky 10 was thought a cinch to win, although, sur-

prisingly, at official odds of 18 to 1. With it scratching, most

touts had a good opinion of Scribouillard III; Schola Cantorum,

a young Anglo-Norman colt out of Assurbanipal; Scapin, a roan

that had won at Chantilly in March (Grand Prix Brillat-Savarin);

Scarborough, a "dilly of a filly", as word had it, with all-black

hair and a trio of gold cups at Ascot; Capharnaum, a mount that

was, though, slightly short in its forward limbs; and, finally, Divin

Marquis, an occasionally moody kind of nag that wasn't tops in

anybody's book but had a habit of starting slowly and rapidly

gaining ground.

Riding Scribouillard, Saint-Martin - Paris's Sir Gordon

Richards - gallops off to an ovation from his faithful public, only

to fall flat on his back at Longchamp's notorious Mill Brook. So

it's Capharnaum that wins, just nosing out Divin Marquis.

6 5

"In my opinion," says Amaury, "Hassan Ibn Abbou is a bit of

a fraud. Has today taught us anything at all?"

Abandoning Longchamp to its aficionados, its huntin', shootin',

fishin' and racin' buffs, Amaury boards a Paris-bound bus along

with his two companions. And it occurs to him that Whisky 10's

withdrawal might still throw light on Vowl's abduction.

"Just 3 days ago you had 3 odds-on nominations; but, with

Whisky scratching and Scribouillard stumbling, Capharnaiim

won!"

"It sort of puts you in mind of a whodunit, don't you think,"

says Olga.

"No," says Amaury: "of an April Fool's Day hoax."

"No," says Ottaviani: "of a Dick Francis."

Our trio strolls into a bar, hoping to drown its frustration in

a round or two of cocktails. Through this bar wafts a languorous

aroma of amaryllis. Stirring a dry Martini, Olga starts painfully,

almost inaudibly, confiding in Conson and Ottaviani:

"If only I'd known - but how could anybody know? Anton

didn't look normal, but, whilst talking to him, it was hard to

grasp what was wrong with him. On occasion my darling would

pound his fists and cry out for . . . for just forty winks, that's all,

forty winks of blissful oblivion. Anton hadn't had a nap in two

months. Two months! His body was on a rack of pain, such pain,

his brain simply wouldn't function, its tribal drums wouldn't stop

pounding, pounding, pounding . . ."

Olga's soliloquy gradually sinks into a sigh as long and languid

as an autumnal chord from a violin.

"Mia carissima," coos Amaury, fondling Olga's hand with an

ardour that's slightly at odds with his usual avuncular joviality,

"if Anton hasn't actually . . . hasn't . . . oh, you know what

I'm trying to say, you'll probably find him in an alcoholic

stupor!"

"Lo giuroV says a martial (and cod Mozartian) Ottavio.

"Do you mind!" sniffs Olga, with a toss of auburn curls.

6 6

It's Ottaviani's turn to sigh. "What I do mind is almost four

days of bloody hard graft with damn all to show for it."

"What about paying a call on Hassan Ibn Abbou now," is

Amaury's proposal, "and finding out what information awaits us

from him?"

Hassan Ibn Abbou owns a charming Louis XVIII villa on Paris's

ultra-chic Quai Branly. Knocking at its door, Amaury finds,

standing in front of him, a footman who fawningly asks him and

Ottaviani (Olga, still low in spirits, had thought to turn in) into

a spacious formal drawing room.

"My companion and I wish to talk to M. Ibn Abbou," says

Amaury.

"If you wouldn't mind waiting, sirs, I shall inform him of your

arrival."

A young man, slightly too good-looking for comfort, sporting

that sort of oblong gold braid that is traditionally worn by a

Parisian flunky, and sashaying towards Amaury with an insinuat-

ing swing of his slim hips, asks him:

"Cocktails for two?"

Amaury opts for a whisky-and-soda, Ottaviani a glass of

Armagnac.

Just at that point, though, from an adjoining room, a clamor-

ous din bursts forth. What confusion! What hubbub! A mirror

smashing, a fist-fight, various dull thuds.

A bloodcurdling cry is drawn from Ibn Abbou: "No! No!

Aaaaargh!"

Amaury jumps out of his chair (and also practically out of his

skin). For a solitary instant, an agonisingly short instant, no

sound at all. And, in an instant following that, crying out again,

Ibn Abbou falls.

Amaury and Ottaviani quickly rush forward to assist him.

But, with a last, dying moan from Hassan Ibn Abbou, it's all

in vain.

Sticking in his back, and right up to its hilt, is a poniard with

6 7

a tip containing a poison known to bring about instant (and

fatal) paralysis.

What nobody could work out, though, was how Abbou's

assassin got away . . .

Finding this situation alarming, to put it mildly, and without

waiting for Ottaviani's authority, Amaury starts burrowing high





and low through Ibn Abbou's villa, finally chancing across a vault

that, as Abbou hadn't told anybody its combination, was got into

with calculation, cunning and a dash of chutzpah, and finding in

it that thick manuscript that Anton had thought to mail to him

only a month ago. It ought to contain 26 folios. Amaury counts

1, 2, 3 . . . to 25; naturally, fatally, a folio is missing. That's

right, you win! No. 5 it is!

So, complication piling on complication, a major conundrum

unfolds: that famous "solicitor who is so boorish as to light up

his cigar in a zoo" (but nobody had any proof that this particular

solicitor was in fact a boor) has a poniard in his back and Anton

Vowl is still missing.

That night, at about two o'clock, Amaury Conson strolls back

to his studio flat, Quai d'Anjou - and, till dawn, till cockcrow,

till first blush of morning, avid to find out just what's going on,

dutifully ploughs through Yowl's diary . . .

6 8

1

In which you will find a word or two about a burial

mound that brought glory to Trajan

ANTON VOWL'S DIARY

A Monday.

Call him Ishmail, and him Ahab, and it Moby Dick.

Tou, Ishmail, phthisic pawn, glutton for musty old manuscripts,

puny scribbling runt, martyr to a myriad of sulks, doldrums and

mulligrubs, you who lit out, packing just a smock, four shirts and a

cotton hanky in your bag, hurtling to salvation, to oblivion and to

mortality, you who saw, surging up in front of you by night, a Bassal-

ian mammoth, a paradigm of pallor and purity, a shining symbol of

immaculation, a giant Grampus coming up for air!

Away four springs, abroad four springs, braving whirlwind, whirl-

pool and typhoon, from Labrador to Fiji, from Jamaica to Alaska,

from Hawaii to Kamchatka.

Midnight, aboard ship, with Pip playing on his harmonica, Star-

buck, Daggoo, Flask, Stubb and Doughboy would sing:

To Ho Ho!

And a flask of rum!

A Nantuckian sailor brought immortality to a titanic combat oppos-

ing, triply, Captain Ahab and that giant Grampus, Moby Dick.

Moby Dick! Two words to chill a strong man's blood, to stir a ship's

rigging with a frisson of horror. Moby Dick! O animal of Astaroth!

Animal of Satan! Its big, blank, brilliant trunk, with its court of

69

birds flying noisily about it, now gulls, now cormorants, now a solitary,

forlorn albatross, would sculpt, so to say, a gigantic, gaping pit, a

curving concavity of nothing, a brimming bowl of air, from a rippling

rut of billows and furrows, would crimp any horizon with its foamy,

whitish dip, a fascinating, paralysing abyss, a milky chasm drawing

you in, drawing you down, down, down, down, flashing at you from

afar, flashing its virginal wrath, foaming at its mouth, a corridor

sucking you in, in, in, in to oblivion, a wat'ry quarry, a plunging

void drawing you forward, drawing you downward, drawing you

dizzily down into a miasma of hallucination, into a Styx as dark as

tar, a ghastly livid whirlpool, a Malstrom! Moby Dick! Only out of

sight of Ahab would anybody talk about it; a bos'n would blanch and

draw a pious cross in front of him; and many an ordinary sailor at

his work would murmur a dominus vobiscum.

And now Ahab would limp forward, supporting his body on an arti-

ficial limb sawn out of wood but as shiny as ivory, an imposing stump

that, many, many springs ago, his sailors had torn off a giant rorqual's

jaw, Ahab, a long and zigzagging furrow tracing its path through

his grizzly, stubbly hair, incising his brow and vanishing at his collar,

a drawn and haggard Ahab now looming out and booming out,

cursing that animal for having got away from him for nigh on 18

springs, cursing it and insulting it.

And now, to his ship's mainmast, Ahab would nail a gold

doubloon, promising it to any sailor who was first to sight his arch-

antagonist.

Night upon night, day upon day, at his ship's prow, numb with

cold, stiff as a rod in his captain's coat, hard as a rock, straight as a

mast, still as a post, and dumb too, not saying a word, not showing

any hint of a human soul, cold as a carcass, but boiling inwardly

with an inhuman wrath, Ahab would stand out, stark and gaunt, a

rumbling volcano, an imploding storm, a still point in a turning

world, against a dark, cloudy horizon, raptly scrutinising it for a sign,

for any sign, of Moby Dick. Sirius would glow uncannily bright in a

starry night sky; and, on top of that mainmast, and akin to nothing

7 0

so much as a dot on an i, would glow, too, a livid halo infusing that

diabolic doubloon and its gold with a wan chiaroscuro.

Ahab's circumnavigation would last four springs. For four long

springs his valiant and foolhardy craft would roam, rolling uncon-

trollably, pitching and tossing, tacking from north to south, from

south to north, combing Triton's wavy, curling hair, labouring now

in August warmth, now in April chill.

It wasAhab who first saw Moby Dick. It was a bright, sunny morning,

without wind or cloud, with an Atlantic as flat as a rug, as limpid

as a looking-glass. Milky-whitish against a lapis-lazuli horizon, Moby

Dick was puffing and blowing, its back forming a foggy, snowy mount

for a flock of birds circling around it.

But first a lull, an almost subliminal instant of tranquil immobility.

Just six furlongs off from Ahab's ship Moby Dick lay: now drifting, a

numinous animal, a symbol of calm awaiting its own storm, fragrant

with a throat-catching aroma, an aroma of purity, of infinity; now,

rising out of that cold, mirrory Atlantic, a lustral halo imbuing all

around it with a virginal glow. Not a sound, not an angry word. Not

a man stirring, as though brought to a standstill by all this calm and

radiancy, as though swaying languidly in vapours of adoration rising

up out of that glassy main, out of that dawning day.

O harmony, total unison, absolution! For an instant, oblivion holds

back, draws back, as though waiting for this snowy Himalaya, this

giant Grampus, to grant absolution to Starbuck, to Pip, to Ishmail

and Ahab.

With burning brow and twisting, hunching, horrifying body, long

did Ahab stand, staring into a void, saying nary a word, only sobbing

- sobbing and shaking.

"Moby Dick! Moby Dick!" was his final, fulminating cry. "Now,

all of you, into a boat!"

Daggoo found his crinkly buckskin chaps handy as a strop for his

harpoon, honing its point till it was as sharp as a razor.



* * *

71

It was an assault that was to last four days, four long days of appalling

conditions and appalling collisions, a furious tug of war with 26 sailors

putting up a prodigious fight, attacking that Bassalian titan, attack-

ing it again and again, puncturing its invincibility, implanting in

it, again and again, a harpoon as sharp as a bistoury, thrusting that

harpoon in right up to its shaft, to its crossbar, whilst Moby Dick

would roar and flail about in pain; but also whilst (with razor-sharp

barbs slicing through its body, with hooks viciously clutching at its skin,

ripping it up into narrow, bloody strips, flaying it, raising its wrath

to a foaming pitch by scratching long furrows along its shiny back) it

unflinchingly stood up to its assailants, butting, upturning and sink-

ing boat upon boat, till it too would sink in its turn, vanishing abruptly

into a turbid, now darkly crimson Atlantic.

But, that night, confronting Ahab aboard his ship, capsizing its

prow, Moby Dick split it in two with a solitary blow. Although, in a

last spasm of fury, Ahab slung his harpoon in midair, to his horror

its cord, twisting back, spun about his own body. Moby Dick, swirling

around, now swam straight for him.

"Till my dying day your blood is all I shall thirst for!" was Ahab's

cry. "From my Stygian limbo I shall assail you! In my abomination

I shall spit on you, spit on you, accurs'd Grampus, animal accurs'd

till Doomsday!"

His own giddily spinning harpoon snagging him, causing him to

thrash about in agony, Ahab's fall was nigh; and, soaring upwards,

Moby Dick caught him on its back and sank out of sight.

All around, yawning in mid-Atlantic, was a livid chasm, a colossal

canyon, a whirlpool sucking down into its foaming spiral, now a sailor's

body, now a harpoon cast in vain, now a capsizing boat, and now, at

last, Ahab's own forlorn ship which its captain's damnation was turn-

ing into a floating coffin . . .

Apocalypsis cum figuris: as always, though, a survivor will hold out,

a Jonah who will claim that, on that day, his damnation, his oblivion,

72

was writ in plain sight in a Grampus's blank iris - blank, blank,

blank, as a tabula rasa, as a void!

Ah, Moby Dick! Ah, moody Bic!

Almost all tout-Paris turns out to mourn Hassan Ibn Abbou's

passing and accompany his coffin to its burial ground - or so

you might think from a column of VIPs so long it holds up traffic

for two hours from Quai Branly to Faubourg Saint-Martin. As

conspicuous in this as in any crowd, Amanda von Comodoro-

Rivadavia stands apart, chatting to Baron Urbain d'Agostino.

Olga sobs unconsolably. Ottaviani is just as surly as usual.

Amaury Conson, still grasping at straws, still struggling to throw

an inkling of light on Anton's "Moby Dick", is lost in his

thoughts.

Hassan Ibn Abbou's tomb is in a columbarium in Antony, a

suburb of Paris; and wholly charming it is, too, juxtaposing trans-

lucid quartz with onyx as blindingly brilliant as a South African

diamond, built up from a solid brass block with incrustations of

iridium and bristling with a galaxy of official cordons and chains,

of ribands, garlands and stars, posthumous honours by which

many a king, many a maharajah, sought publicly to display an

unconditional admiration for Ibn Abbou - Croix du Combattant,

Victoria Cross, Nichan Iftikhar, Ours Royal du Labrador and

Grand'Croix du Python Pontifical.

Six orators in all hold forth. First, Fran^ois-Armand d'Arson-

val, in his capacity as official administrator of a Civic Tribunal

that Hassan had thought out from A to Z; following him, and

acting for a major Anglo-Iranian bank, Victor, Baron d'Aiguillon

(no vulgar factotum, Hassan was for long his loyal right-hand

man); an Imam from Agadir who lauds his patriotism, his nation-

alistic passion for Morocco; Lord Gadsby V. Wright (Hassan

was his assistant at Oxford and by vigorous string-pulling would

obtain his nomination as Auctor Honoris Causa), who charms

his auditors with an account  so high-flown, so orotund, it's

almost Johnsonian - of his confidant's curriculum studiorum; and

73

Raymond Q. Knowall, who talks of Hassan's spasmodic though

always cordial association with OuLiPo.

Finally it's Carcopino's turn, Carcopino, a luminary of I'lnsti-

tut, that mortuary of Immortals on Paris's Quai Conti, who starts:

"Six springs ago Hassan Ibn Abbou won a uninominal 3-ballot

poll by 25 out of 26, a poll that was to stir up a commotion for

a day or two - but, as I say, voting in favour of Hassan Ibn

Abbou was practically unanimous, so our organisation thought

to appoint him to a subcommission of PC-IMAM (Patrimonial

Corpus of Inscriptions in Morocco's Adas Mountains), a fairly

lowly position but which had its own distinction, won by Hassan

on account of his polymathic study of an almost unknown tumu-

lus (and nobody who did know it could work out its import)

from an oppidum civium romanorum which a scholar from Munich,

a Judaist in flight from Austria's A nschluss, had found in diggings

at Thugga (or, as it's nowadays known, Dougga). It's said that

it withstood many attacks by Jugurtha, it's said that Juba Afri-

canus 'did pass a night by it' ( Titus Livius dixit) and that Trajan

had a villa built on it for Adrianus, his son by adoption."

Carcopino, though, citing Piganiol's biography, affirms that

this is only a rumour.

Notwithstanding that Trajan has nothing much to do with

Hassan Ibn Abbou, a handful of his auditors warmly applaud.

For, although talking in a low, unsonorous, almost soporific mur-

mur, our Immortal knows how to grip his public with his oratory.

Now, totally impromptu, Carcopino starts painting a vivid

word-portrait of his companion. "Hassan Ibn Abbou was tragic-

ally cut down in his maturity, and his passing is a loss not only

to that Institut for which I am proud to talk today but also, most

profoundly, to our Nation  and it's a loss not only of a man, of

a scholar, but also of his vast scholarship and, which is just as

important, his unfailing practical know-how. For nobody could

match Hassan's capacity for conciliating romanisation and bar-

barisation, for coming to grips with an ambiguous if highly

significant association linking two outwardly opposing notions,

7 4

so constituting, so instituting, an insight out of which, poor

orphan as it is on this tragic day of days, will unfold, by that

important, nay, by that paramount, innovation of Hassan Ibn

Abbou's, will unfold, I say, a truly dazzling tomorrow. Faith -

that is what all of us now must put our trust in, faith in that

lowly grain that Hassan Ibn Abbou was first to plant, that acorn

of thought that will grow into an oak and thus grant us, and for

always, immunity from hardship," Carcopino says in conclusion,

his vocal chords almost cracking, his auditors sympathising with

him, sobbing along with him, sharing his pain, won round by

his oratorical skills and not daring to applaud.

To Amaury Conson's disgust, though, a man standing not far

off is actually smiling. But this individual, tall, of stocky build

and sporting a chic raglan coat, cut as only British tailors know

how, has a candid, jovial and, in a word, chummy look about

him, oozing "warmth and charmth" (to borrow a famous

Goldwynism), that soon disarms him. Amaury walks up to him

and asks point-blank:

"Pardon my intrusion, but may I know what's amusing you?"

"If you must know, I'm smiling at an omission in his oration

that I find most significant."

"An omission?" gasps Amaury, who cannot mask his agitation.

"About six months ago, for his CNRS Commission Ph.D.,

Hassan Ibn Abbou was author of a succinct but, in my own

opinion, slipshod monograph on jus latinum, which is to say,

Latin law, a topic that our Moroccan, notwithstanding his lack

of rigour on this occasion, could claim to know backwards. This

monograph of his sought to focus on a particular point, a point

so baffling it had thrown all you highbrows into a tizzy: to wit,

what obligation, if any, bound a city, a town or a rural district

to allow its population (rustics, occasionally shopfolk) a status

abjuring any kind of distinction that had, ipso facto, a Roman

outrank a Saharan nomad? Although not wholly satisfactory,

notably in its conclusions, his work, confirming Marc

Bloch's intuition vis-a-vis Donjon-Vassal's study, Mauss's on

75

Chaman-Tribu unification and also Chomsky's on that famous

Insignificant-Significant junction, was ironclad proof that no such

obligation was binding (it was at most an option among many),

thus proving in its turn that any analysis (from a soi-disant dog-

matic notion of Law) of a substratum which would contain colon-

isation, romanisation or barbarisation was automatically illusory.

It was, thus, important to avoid any sort of a priori thinking and,

most of all, to distinguish what about it was truly infrastructural.

It was a paradoxical situation: Karl Marx an Immortal! Nobody

thought to find such a day coming to pass. But a majority of

jurors had no difficulty swallowing it, and it was only Carcopino

(known at Quai Conti as Cola Pinada or Copacabana) who was

said to cry out 'Idiot! Idiot! Idiot!'"

"But what about that oration?" murmurs Amaury.

"I know. I admit I found that surprising. I must say I thought

our Immortal would slip in a handful of cryptic allusions to it.

But not at all!"

"Shhh!" says Olga, who has stood apart from this discussion.

"It's winding up now."

This man formally doffs his panama, that man his shako, a third

his homburg. An old fogy of an admiral, obviously gaga, starts

saluting nobody in particular. Ottaviani bashfully sniffs into his

cotton hanky. Olga sobs again. Paparazzi rush about, snapping

away at Amanda von Comodoro-Rivadavia who, with pinpoint

timing, falls into a swoon in Urbain d'Agostino's awaiting arms.

Now, first, a sacristan in a bright canary cappa magna and

waving a solid gold thingamajig . . . urn, you know, that sprink-

ling thing, walks forward; following him, a trio of chaplains

brandishing a slightly shopworn crucifix with its kitschy canopy

of swishily rusding frills; finally six human caryatids hoisting up

a mahogany coffin by its shiny brass knobs.

A clumsy pratfall - and Hassan's coffin slips, falls, its lid swings

up. Holy Christmas! No Hassan Ibn Abbou!



* * *

7 6

Talk of kicking up a row! What with diplomats accusing cops,

cops accusing Matignon, Matignon accusing Maison Roblot,

Maison Roblot accusing Maison Borniol, Maison Borniol

accusing - try to work this out if you can - Foch Hospital,

Foch Hospital accusing Carcopino, Carcopino accusing Baron

d'Aiguillon's Anglo-Iranian Bank and that bank accusing Pompi-

dou, Pompidou compromising Giscard, Giscard blaming Papon,

Papon in his turn lodging a strong complaint against Foccard

. . . it's a daisy-chain that could go on ad infinitum!

"I can't stand it!" says Ottavio Ottaviani. "First Ibn Barka,

now Ibn Hassan. Ibn forbid a third such calamity!"

It's a difficult job hushing up such a murky affair, but within

days a curtain of fog and iron, as Winston Churchill would say,

is drawn down tight. Nobody claims to know anything at all of

Anton Vowl's abduction - if abduction it was. And now, simi-

larly, nobody claims to know anything at all of Hassan Ibn

Abbou's body-snatching.

7 7

III

DOUGLAS HAIG

C L I F F O R D

10

In which an amazing thing occurs to an unwary

basso profundo

A day or two on - with, for company, that curious individual

who had had such an illuminating talk with him at Hassan Ibn

Abbou's burial - Amaury Conson pays a call on Olga who, laid

low with both a sniffly cold and a crippling bout of lumbago, is

vacationing in a small family manor at Azincourt.

It's by train that our two protagonists go first to Arras.

"In days of old," says Amaury's companion in a nostalgic drawl,

"if you had an inclination, say, or an obligation, to go to Dinard

or Pornic, Arras or Cambrai, your only option was to climb into

a mail coach, usually a wobbly old jalopy. As your trip would

last from four to six days, you would try to ward off monotony

by chatting to your coachman, taking an occasional sip of brandy

from a flask, skimming through a radical tract, airing your

opinion on this, that and virtually anything you could think of,

talking shop, narrating an amusing play by Sardou and holding

forth on a cutthroat's trial that had all Paris in its grip (notwith-

standing his prodigious oratorical skills, you'd attack this

cutthroat's QC, who, disparaging all his antagonist's accusations,

alibis and affidavits as a put-up job, sought to disclaim, in toto,

what was almost cast-iron proof of guilt and also vilify a poor,

law-abiding pharmacist from whom our assassin had bought his

poison, laudanum; you'd find fault with this or that juror; nor

had that shifty procurator struck you as wholly trustworthy). You

would gratify your company with ironic bon mots on political

topics, wittily puncturing Du Paty du Clam's corruption, as also

8 1

Cassagnac's, Drumont's and Mac-Mahon's. You would sing that

"Chanson du Tourlouru" that Paulin or Bach was immortalising

in Paris's most modish nightclubs and music halls. You would

vigorously affirm your unconditional admiration for Rostand's

Cyrano or Sarah as I'Aiglon. Finally, you'd trot out a dirty story or two, about a maharajah and a cancan girl, or a vicar and a

choirboy, giving your auditors a good laugh whilst your mail

coach would roll on and on till dusk. At nightfall you would sup

in a charming rural inn. For a paltry six francs you'd tuck into

fish or crab, lamb or mutton, washing it all down with a good

strong Burgundy or a Latour-Marcillac, a Musigny or a Pom-

mard, gorging and carousing away till you'd had a skinful! Upon

which you would go for a long walk or, as you'd no doubt

call it in your hoity-toity fashion, a postprandial constitutional,

through a public park with stout oaks and spindly acacias and

tall, thin pawlonias, with marbly malls and lush and languid

lawns. You'd sip a Curasao, a maraschino or a boiling hot toddy.

You'd play a hand of whist or pharaoh. Or you might play a

round of billiards and win a franc or two from a local rustic.

And, gradually, you'd yawn and start to think about shambling

upstairs to your room. First, though, you'd drift into a chintzy

front room, in which you might obtain, gratis, a chocolat au kirsch,

a dainty bit of ribbon or a tiny flask of Armagnac. You'd find a

buxom maid to carry off with you up to your room and, having

had your filthy fun with this bit of crackling, you'd nod off at

last, all in."

"Uh huh," sighs Amaury, "nowadays you go by train. It's rapid,

but totally lacking in chic."

Concurring with this opinion, his companion draws out of

a bag on his lap a curious cardboard box full of oblong

cigars.

"A brazza?"

"I won't say no," says Amaury. "A propos, I still don't know what I'm to call you."

"Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan," says his companion.

8 2

"Is that so?" murmurs Amaury, caught short, but instantly

adding, "I'm Amaury Conson."

"Amaury Conson! Hadn't you a son who . .

Amaury abruptly cuts in. "I had six sons. All now, alas, food

for worms. All, that is, b u t - "

"Yvon!"

"That's right! But how do you know?"

Savorgnan grins. "Don't worry. You'll soon know my story.

What you should know now is that I too was a confidant of

Anton Vowl. But as I'm British, living at Oakwood, not far from

Oxford, I hardly saw him from month to month. That said,

though, Vowl was willing to talk about his condition, claiming,

as all of you know, that his dying day was at hand. Nobody took

him at his word  no, not Olga, not Hassan, not you, and not,

I'm sorry to say, yours truly. But, six days ago, Hassan rang up

and I said I'd discuss it all with him. As soon as I got to Paris,

alas, I was told of his dying . . ."

"But did you work out what that postscript of his was trying

to say to us?"

"No, but in my opinion it's wrong of us to try construing

it word for word. Was 'a solicitor so boorish as to light up his

cigar in a zoo' alluding to Hassan Ibn Abbou? I don't think

so, and you know why? (a) Vowl didn't know Hassan was a

solicitor; (b) that word 'boorish' didn't apply to him at all; and

(c) you'd catch him smoking at most two Havanas in six

months."

"Hmm. What you say has a ring of truth about it, particularly,"

adds Amaury, "as Hassan, with that addiction of his to marga-

ritas, had no strong liking for whisky."

"That's right. In addition, Hassan was much too fond of his

local Jardin d'Acclimatation to think of going to a zoo."

"So why that odd postscript?"

"I thought at first it was a phony. My hunch, now, is that it

was his only option: Anton had to go out on a full stop, so to

say. Possibly, his wish was to transmit a signal to us that wasn't

8 3

so ambiguous; but, not having such a pithy communication at

his disposal. . ."

"Nothing is as cryptic as a void," murmurs Amaury.

Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan starts. "Why do you say that?"

"I saw it in his diary. I should say, I finally got it through my

skull that Hassan had always said that. Which is why," Amaury

adds, "I'm taking you to Azincourt to visit Olga."

Not a word is said from that point onwards. Savorgnan puffs on

his brazza and Amaury, burrowing into a book bought at a station

kiosk, a long and circuitous saga about an association of major

con artists, its liquidation, gradual slump, crash and bankruptcy,

wholly fails to grasp that staring at him, in print, is a solution to

that conundrum that is haunting him, consuming him . . .

His train briskly chugs on, making its dining-car chairs rock

to and fro. An undulating rural panorama, with a solitary plough-

man raking his patch of land from a shiny tractor, bowls along

backwards as if on its way back to Paris. Now both train and

panorama start grinding to a halt, giving way to a drab, slummy

suburb, a draughty platform, an array of hangars, a bus stop and

a roundabout.

Amaury and Savorgnan go by coach from Arras to Aubigny -

a slowcoach of a coach crawling along at 20 mph maximum -

and on foot to Azincourt (or, archaically, Agincourt, that

ignominious blot and bloodstain on our military history).

A hillock, curving as unassumingly as in a child's drawing and

smiling at visitors with an aroma so piquant, so vividly autumnal,

it cannot but charm a discriminating nostril, an intoxicating cock-

tail of aromas, in fact, both cordial and miasmal, of myosotis

palustris, damp wood, wild mushrooms and rotting humus - this

hillock, I say, stands just in front of Olga's sanctuary, a charming

old manor that Francois Daunou had built for his family circa

1800.

Whilst sycophantically traditionalist masons sought to copy

8 4

Hardouin-Mansard's Grand Trianon, constituting as it did a

summit, a paragon, of crypto-classicism, Soufflot, wading across

a flock of Rubicons with that nonchalant aplomb, that faindy

lunatic audacity, that was to bring him such popular acclaim,

thought to submit to his august patron a ground plan of rococo

inspiration: which is to say, portals with flying ramparts, mock-

Tudor moldings, tympanums and astragals, plus (this was what

was truly innovatory) a floridly imposing wing flanking it with

its own gothic quad.

It was, alas, a Rubicon too far. For four days Daunou would

squint this way and that at Soufflot's rough drafts, finally mur-

muring, "I'll say this for it, it's . . . original" and giving him, for

his pains, a kick in his hind parts. To avoid a fatal scalping from

M. Guillotin's sharp razor, Soufflot had to fly to Lyon clad as a

pastrycook.

A downcast Daunou saw Chalgrin, Vignon, Potain and Hit-

torf, all of whom said no, and at last struck gold with an unknown

quantity, Francois Tilman Suys, a Dutchman. Placing abundant

funds at Suys's disposal, Daunou told him to follow nobody's

inspiration but his own. And, as nobody is as rascally as a

Dutchman, so much hard cash was thrown away on this folly -

a colonial pavilion with a rhomboid roof, its supporting arch

inlaid with ugly (or, if not ugly, vulgar) frostwork - that, with

its finishing touch, Daunou was without a brass farthing. With

just two months of occupation, it was put up for auction. A

shady individual from Audruicq bought it for a song, installing

first of all a stud farm and, during that short outburst of optimism

brought about by victory at Wagram, a casino in which you could

find McDonald, Soult, Duroc, Caulaincourt, Savary, Junot and

Oudinot playing whist and baccarat. (This crook, it's said, got

away with a cool million.) At that point it was won off him at

cards by a Louis-Philippard cop, who was fond of playing host

to an unsavoury crowd of drunks, thugs and informants, until

succumbing to a fatal stab wound during a notably riotous orgy.

As this cop had no offspring to hand it on to in his will, his

8 5

manor, soon going to wrack and ruin from casual looting, would

turn into a lair of tramps, criminals, vagrants and ruffians.

In April 1918 a British major, Augustus B. Clifford, advancing

with his battalion towards no-man's-land and putting his troops

up in it for a night, took a liking to this quaint, rundown manor.

In 1924, now of Canadian nationality and occupying a post as

a consular administrator in Frankfurt, Clifford bought Azincourt

for his family, living in it on and off whilst pursuing his diplo-

matic obligations. Through his caring disposition as an occupant,

along with his polish and discrimination as a man, its roof, which

was caving in, was gradually brought back to mint condition; its

walls had a thorough scrubbing down; oil, and not coal, was

burnt; and a spacious parkland was laid out.

Augustus B. Clifford had a son, naming him Douglas Haig in

honour of that grand old warrior, his victorious commandant at

Douaumont.

A charming child, Douglas Haig (or Haig tout court, for that

was how his doting papa always thought of him) had an idyllic

infancy at Azincourt, filling it with his boyish whoops, playing

blind man's buff on its soft, cottony lawn, climbing its acacias,

giving food to a fish, a young carp, that swam about in a small

pond, taming it not without difficulty, baiting it with crumbs,

worms, wasps, moths, a gadfly or two and an occasional crocus.

It would swarm up at his approach, at his whistling or murmuring

call of "Jonah! Jonah!".

Haig had a lot of chums, most living in town and mad about

sport - football and rugby, mainly, but also organising amusing

trials by bow-and-arrow and going on long cross-country walking

tours. Coming back from such jaunts, his companions would find

his nanny waiting with a tray of muffins and fruit tarts and cups

of hot cocoa. So Augustus's manor was an oasis of calm and

good humour, of high jinks and high spirits. It was, in short, a

kind of Arcadia.

8 6

At 18, having sat his school finals, Augustus's son found his

vocation: basso profundo. Haig, though not what you would

call a prodigy, had a natural vocal gift; and, unconscionably fond

of singing, was willing to work long and hard at honing his skills,

studying composition at Paris's Schola Cantorum. Fricsay taught

him plain song, Solti canon, von Karajan tutti and Krips har-

mony. Sir Adrian Boult sat in on his first public audition, at 19,

in Turin's Carignano Hall. Haig sang "Unto Us a Child Is Born",

a madrigal by Ottavio Rinucinni and, to finish with, a trio of

arias from Aida. Boult was wholly won round, writing a word

of introduction to Karl Bohm, who was staging II dissoluto punito

ossiallDon Giovanni at Urbino's "Musical May". Bohm had Haig

sing for him, found him vocally convincing if occasionally shrill

in a high pitch and, handing him a copy of Mozart's composition,

told him to study it for a forthcoming production.

Placing his gifts in Karl Bohm's firm but faithful hands, Haig

was soon gaining ground. "Your fortissimo is possibly too lan-

guid," Bohm would admonish him on occasion, or "You should

attack Altra brama quaggiu with total rigour and accuracy. Don't

distort it by howling or roaring. It has to flow forth without any

vibrato." Mostly, though, his pupil brought him satisfaction.

That spring, on a boiling hot day, strolling along a corridor

in Urbino's ducal palazzo (visitors to which would habitually find

him practising sol-fa of a morning just as his idol, Caruso, had),

Haig ran into Olga Mavrokhordatos, a soprano whom Bohm

had cast as Donna Anna, and took an instant liking (I should

say, loving) to that world-famous diva. Nor did his passion fall

on stony ground: it took him just two days to obtain Olga's

blushing accord and to marry his inamorata in San Marino. A

municipal official, vainly stifling a yawn, for it was going on

midnight, saw it as his duty to trot out a string of hoary old

truisms on conjugal rights and obligations. As a consolation,

though, on that indigo night, from an imposing rampart on San

Marino's main plaza, and all night through until first faint flush

of dawn, soft strains and . paradisiacal chords would drift down,

8 7

music from I Virtuosi di Roma, rigadoons and madrigals, arias,

rondos and sinfonias, music to charm an animal with two backs.

0 blissful instant! O Calm! A nocturnal violin singing a song

as candid and natural as a lark's, and an alto, and an organist's

sonorous clarion - and Haig advancing slowly, his hand tighdy

clasping Olga's.

1 know that you too, you, my ghostly collaborator, hanging

on my words, would wish it all to work out satisfactorily, with

Douglas Haig Clifford marrying Olga Mavrokhordatos, with

both Douglas and his Olga knowing only harmony and connubial

bliss, "a spiritual coupling of two souls" (as Jonson put it), and

with Olga giving birth to 26 sons, all surviving into full maturity.

Alas, no, that's asking too much! I cannot hold out any such

possibility of absolution. Nor will God grant Douglas Haig a

pardon. Infusing, always and infallibly, that cryptic signal that I

am trying, and will go on trying, ad infinitum if I must, to clarify,

Damnation will do with Haig what it has to do - with just four

days to go till that swan song of his which, sung in Urbino,

would link up, 20 springs on, with Anton Vowl's kidnapping

and Hassan Ibn Abbou's assassination . . .

To transform him into an apparition, into that ghoulish Com-

mandant who, Uomo di sasso, Uomo bianco, brings Mozart's

drammagiocoso to its climax, Karl Bohm actually thought to wrap

Haig in a sculptor's mould with an iron collar, almost causing

him to swoon. A broad slit was cut through this mould, giving

his singing a rich bass intonation without in any way muffling

it. Bohm, happy with such an acoustical idiosyncrasy, told him,

"In fact, it's akin to having a rotting carcass posthumously cursing

us from within his coffin." Bohm was right; alas, nobody could

know just how right. For (and how such a thing could occur,

nobody would say), as a pallid Haig was put into his mould, and

it was shut tight, and laid on thick with stucco, totally confining

him, Bohm, aghast, saw that nobody had put slits in for him to

look through. But Bohm also saw no point in panicking, for it

8 8

was just at that instant that Don Juan commands his flunky to

ask Haig (in his capacity, naturally, as Mozart's Commandant)

to lunch with him.

First, Haig was drawn up on a sling. So far, so good. From

that point on, though, bad luck would dog his path.

All of you know Don Giovanni's closing bars of music:

Giovanni sings: ". . . Grido indiavolato . . ."

And his flunky (who, in this production, was sung by van

Dam): " Ah sip/nor . . . Uuom di sasso . . . Uuomo bianco . . . Ah

padron . . . Tum-ti-tum . . ."

This was Haig's prompt and van Dam was waiting for him to

walk forward, coming into sight as Bohm had his violinists play

a closing, fading chord; and, advancing again to allow his public

to savour his imposing physical proportions, to launch into his

famous "Dow Giovanni . . . m'invitasti".

But Haig was to wait an instant too long. On his approaching

Don Juan, van Dam haltingly sang "Ah Padron . . . Siam tutti

morti" . . . Haig, looking around him in confusion, as though

slowly going adrift, took fright, turning crazily this way and that,

spinning about as a robot or a mutant might run amok and loudly

crying out "mi mi mi mi mi" . . . At which point our basso lost

all control, stubbing his foot on a column, tripping up, swaying

and falling - falling as straight and stiff as a mast, as a baobab

adroidy cut in half. With his fall making a loud thud, its shock

so startling that, as though imitating Humpty Dumpty tumbling

off his wall, Haig's mould split from top to bottom, a cry of

horror shook that auditorium to its foundations, from its balcony

to its stalls, and from its gods to its royal box. A long furrow,

ashy in colour, zigzagging from his foot to his skull, ran through

that mould, that stucco trap in which poor Haig was caught,

Assuring it with tiny sharp cracks, through which, as in a crumb-

ling dam, purplish blood would start to spurt and spout till,

finally, stomach-turningly, gushing forth.

Using a blowtorch, a jack and an automatic drill, unhitching

him as you might pluck a rotting pit, say, from an inhuman fruit,

8 9

Bohm's assistants got Haig out and saw, first of all, on his body,

a grisly, ashy furrow similar to that on his mould, also running

from top to bottom and zigzagging down his torso as a bolt of

lightning from Thor might flash across a lurid Nordic sky. And

though Haig's own doctor would insist on carrying out an

autopsy, nobody could work out any natural grounds for his

dying in this way . . .

Why, nobody could say, but Augustus B. Clifford was also at

Urbino's "Musical May". And, that night, following his son's

tragic mishap, Clifford slunk into a local hospital  in which

Haig's body was laid out - took it away with him by swaddling

it in a shroud and carrying it out by a back door, bought a

Hispano-Suiza sports car and, driving all night, all day and all

night again, as frantically as a madman, as fast and furious as a

champion at Indianapolis or Brands Hatch, got to Azincourt. A

local myth has it that Clifford actually had his son's body burnt;

probably, though, Haig is now lying in his coffin, possibly

in that shady nook of parkland on which, as it's also said,

grass grows in particularly thick clumps and in a particularly

intriguing form, almost as though a topiarist had had a hand in

shaping it: that of a harpoon with 3 prongs or a hand with 3

digits, Satan's diabolical sign such as might initial a Faustian

contract.

Augustus, whom many local townsfolk thought raving mad,

would go for months and months without quitting his mansion

at Azincourt and would hurl rocks at any infant straying into his

domain, any busybody hawking goods or any tramp asking for

alms at his door. A high wall was built around its grounds, which,

at night, it was said, would turn it into a prison, a sort of Spandau,

with its solitary, voluntary convict, who would now stay indoors

for good. You might, at most, find his maid in town buying a

ham or a pair of fatty lamb chops. But if you sought to chat up

this maid, who, of part-Iroquois origin, was known as "Squaw",

if you said, "So, Squaw, your boss, still off his nut?", Squaw

9 0

would shout back at you, "Sonofabitch!" and "Scumbag!",

two traditional Iroquois oaths.

And, as Squaw was an old judo pro, it wasn't politic to

insist.

Occasionally, too, with an ugly gap-tooth grin, Squaw would

add: "If boss good to Jonah, boss good man."

For it was known that Augustus, conscious of his son's mission,

would approach his pond at noon sharp, murmuring "Jonah,

Jonah!" Though Jonah was grown-up now, it always swam

upwards at his call; and Augustus would throw crumbs at it that

it would gulp down with obvious satisfaction.

It took Olga six springs to track down Augustus, who had only

caught sight of his gracious in-law for an instant. On Olga's initial

arrival at Azincourt, Squaw had instructions not to unlock its

door to this prima donna for whom Augustus's son had had such

a strong passion. But as things would work out, Augustus, taking

pity on Olga and also itching to satisfy a natural curiosity, would

start to thaw and gradually warm to this fascinating woman who

told him about holy matrimony with a man as romantic as his son,

a union brought, alas, to a tragically swift and abrupt conclusion.

Augustus in his turn would talk of Haig in his childhood,

giving scraps to Jonah, climbing acacias and playing blind

man's buff.

Taking a fancy to Azincourt, finding in it a tranquillity missing

in Paris - in which it was work, work, work all day long! - Olga

was soon paying it four visits a month, going for long walks

through its grounds, drinking fruit cocktails in a formal drawing

room from which Augustus had dustcloths vanish in honour of

his charming visitor. Following a light lunch, consisting of cold

cuts, salad and fruit, Olga, slumping on to a ravishing mahogany

sofa (still giving off vibrations from a torrid affair that La Grisi

had had on it with a Boyar and for which a youthful Augustus

had paid a tidy sum at an auction), Olga, I say, would stitch a

dainty rustic motif on a patchwork quilt, whilst Augustus, sitting

9 1

upright at his grand piano, would play a sonata by Albinoni,

Haydn or Auric. Occasionally, too, Olga sang a song by Brahms

or Schumann that would float out into a starry night sky.

9 2

10

Which will, I trust, gratify fanatics of Pindaric lyricism

Whilst, far off, a dog, an Alsatian or an Afghan hound, starts

howling mournfully, Amaury knocks at Olga's front door and

Clifford's maid soon unbolts it.

"Morning, Squaw," says a smiling Amaury, visibly savouring

such an unusual alias.

"Good day to you, Sir Amaury," says Squaw; "and good day

to you too, Sir Savorgnan."

Amaury, caught short, looks squintingly at Savorgnan.

"What's this? Do you also know Squaw?"

"Didn't it occur to you I might?"

"Why . . . no," admits Amaury.

"I told you, didn't I, and not all that long ago, whilst our train

was drawing into Arras, I told you that you'd soon know my

story in its totality. So now you know just how similar my curricu-

lum, so to say, is to yours: an unfailing aspiration uniting us

now as it always has and always will. Your information is my

information, your informants my informants, your companions

my companions - so it's not surprising, is it, that our paths should

finally cross as both of us scurry about on this cryptic pursuit of

ours..

"Similia similibus cumntur," a witty Amaury sums up.

"Contmria contmriis cumntur," a sardonic Savorgnan snaps

back.

Pointing indoors, Squaw buts in. "Lady Olga is waiting for

you."

9 3

Amaury and Savorgnan stroll into a stylish living room: two

nylon rugs of a lilyish purity, oval armchairs, a lamp (from China)

of such formal sophistication that, by comparison, Noguchi's

work would look almost naif, a divan as long as a bar in a

Hawaiian nightclub with big shiny vinyl cushions in Day-Glo

colours and, filling a wall from top to bottom, an Op Art church

window by Sartinuloc.

Olga is dozing in a hammock, a hand trailing daintily

floorwards. Amaury stoops to kiss it, and Savorgnan follows

suit.

"Cari amid" murmurs Olga with a languorous yawn, "I

know I can always count on you, both of you. Augustus

wants to say a word or two. Sound that gong, Amaury, will

you."

Picking up a small aluminium gong, Amaury whacks it, pro-

ducing a sound which, if a bit "off", has an oddly long-drawn-out

vibration.

Abruptly, as though by magic, Augustus B. Clifford is standing

in his own doorway. Clifford, a frail old fossil, wrinkly of brow,

frosty of hair, and having to cup his hand to catch what is

said to him, plods up to Savorgnan and puts his arms around

him:

"Wilburg, old chap, how do you do?"

"How do you do?" says Savorgnan with typical urbanity.

"How was your trip?"

"Oh, it wasn't too bad."

"No, not bad at all," adds Amaury, who, as usual, has to put

in his two bits' worth.

"Good, good," says Clifford, rubbing his hands. "Now sit

down, sit down, both of you."

Olga hands round a tray of fruit and fruit cocktails and fruit

crystals: fruit, only fruit, which our visitors dutifully swallow

without a word. In fact, nobody says anything at all. Savorgnan

coughs. Olga sighs.

9 4

"What all of you must do now," says Olga at last, "is pool

what you know about this quicksand that risks sucking us in as

though along a giant straw. It's my opinion, and yours too, I

know, that during this past month (which will finish today) just

too much damn bad luck - or, as Augustus would put it, a

disturbingly high ratio of affliction - has struck down two of our

companions. Now, apart from a handful of scraps, you still lack

information on Anton's abduction and Hassan's . . . passing

away." (Prim Olga was always loath to say that basic D-word

that for many in our civilisation is still a major taboo.) "But what

you do know, or think you know, is that at its crux is a con-

undrum worthy of a Sphinx and it is its signification that you

must try to grasp. Which is why, as I say, Augustus and I want

to join up with you by pooling our information and coordinating

our actions!"

"Your proposition is worth its avoirdupois in gold," says

Augustus.

"You can say that again!" says Savorgnan (no doubt in a malici-

ous allusion to Augustus's linguistic pomposity). "Probably you,

Olga, or you, Amaury, know a thing or two that I don't and

probably I know a thing or two that you don't and it's by closing

ranks that our horizons will roll back and a communal intuition

spring forth!"

Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan is a hard act to follow. Amaury

simply shouts, "Bravo!" And Squaw, approaching with a tray of

drinks, caps this with "Hip hip hooray!"

A toast.

Proposing to submit his contribution first, Amaury maintains

that it is, a priori, of particular import. This was a slighdy surpris-

ing tack for him to adopt, but it gains him his right to hold forth

first.

Amaury starts straight in without any banal small talk. "I'm

now familiar with most if not all of Anton Vowl's diary, in which

I found 5 or 6 allusions to a book, a work of fiction, which, it

claims, contains a solution to our conundrum. Anyway, I found

9 5

indications in it of why this book was so crucial for him, without

Anton actually giving anything away."

'That's right," says Savorgnan, "you might say our chum had

a gift for both showing and masking, both giving and taking

away."

"Larvati ibant obscuri sola sub nocta," murmurs Olga, who was,

as is obvious, no classical scholar.

'Thus," adds Amaury, tactfully ignoring Olga's Latin, "on

occasion it's Moby Dick or a postwar work by Thomas Mann or

a fiction by Isidro Parodi initially brought out in 1950 or so by

La Croix du Sud. But Vowl's diary also contains a quotation from

Kafka, an allusion to a 'McGufiin', to a King and on occasion

to Rimbaud. I found, in all of that, a point in common: an

apparition (if you'll allow my using such an oxymoron) of

a blank, a Void."

"A Void!" shouts Augustus B. Clifford, dropping his crystal

glass and spilling aquavit on his rug.

"A Void!" moans Olga, smashing a lamp in agitation.

"A Void!" roars Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan, swallowing half

his cigar.

"A Void!" brays Squaw in a shrill and jangling whinny, atomis-

ing a trio of matching mirrors.

"A Void, right, that's what I said," affirms Amaury: "it all turns

on a Void. But, by constantly writing about 'a Void', what do

you think Anton was alluding to?"

From a cupboard Augustus pulls out an album in foolscap

format bound in sharkskin.

"This is what our postman brought us from Anton a month

ago day for day."

Doing a rapid calculation, Amaury says:

"In short, just two days prior to his abduction."

"That's right. You won't find a word in it, though, but for

what I think you call a 'small ad' which Anton probably cut out

of his Figaro and stuck in."

Olga, Clifford and Savorgnan form a group around Amaury,

9 6

who starts scrutinising Anton's album. It consists of 26 folios,

all blank but for a solitary column, without any sort of illustration,

stuck on to folio No. 5, a column that Amaury runs through in

a faint murmur:

DOWN WITH OBSCURITY

(Homo w*sh*s wh*t*r th*n P*rs*l)

ANYTHING can look virginal, for It will wash

ANYTHING AT ALL: your pants, stockings, T-shirts,

your shifts, smocks and cardigans,

your saris and Arab burnous.

ANYTHING AT ALL: your cotton pillowslips and cotton

sailor suits,

but also your woodwork, your black puddings, your raisins,

your spirits, your hands, your pains

your worms, your swords

your big fish in small ponds, your small fish in big ponds

your hair, your coal

your nights without 40 winks, your connubials without 69

your savings put away for a rainy day,

your billows, your too famous flaws, your fabrics without a scar

your omissions, your gaps, your lapsus

your manuscripts

your aims and ambitions, your months in a shopping plaza,

your notations for hautboy, your abominations for Tarzan,

your bars and bistros, ad infinitum, a Void, a Void, a Void!

D O W N W I T H O B S C U R I T Y

"Alas, only a Champollion would know how to clarify that,"

murmurs a downcast Amaury.

"It's my turn now," says Savorgnan, who can hardly wait to

add his contribution. "A month ago I too got mail from Anton

9 7

Vowl. It had on it no distinguishing marks indicating who it was

from, but it was obvious that it had to do with our missing

companion" - adding, "although I still can't work out why Vowl

was so stubborn about maintaining his incognito . . ."

"What was in yours?" asks Amaury, as jumpy as a cat on a hot

tin roof.

"I'm coming to that. Look."

Unzipping his holdall, and rummaging through it, Savorgnan

pulls out a card and holds it up in front of his trio of companions.

"It's a 'kaolin' card (kaolin is a kind of clay found in China),

black as tar from a coating of Indian ink, at which a skilful local

craftsman ground away with a sharp scraping tool (or possibly a

vaccination pin), his inspiration for such a cunning notion no

doubt arising from a contraption thought up by Jarjack, who

was imitating that sad circus clown, that 'August', to whom (prior

to him) Oudiys arch-rival had brought immortality. And this

craftsman, by judiciously stripping off parts of its black back-

ground, finally had a diagram of a high-quality finish akin to

bamboo inscriptions such as you'll occasionally find on wash-

drawings from Japan."

"Is it from Japan?" Olga wants to know.

"Yup, it's from Japan all right. I instandy shot off for a

talk about it with my boss," says Savorgnan, "to wit, Gadsby

V. Wright. And with him I took a train to Oxford to

show its inscription to Parsifal Ogdan. This is a transcription

of it:

Kuraki yori

Kuraki michi ni zo

Usuzumi ni

Kaku tamazusa to

Kari miyum kana

"Sounds charming," says Augustus.

"It's a ha'ikai," says Savorgnan, "or should I say a tanka, but

not, as you might think, by Narihira. No, it's by Izumi Shikibu

9 8

(scholars, in fact, claim that it's probably his final work, his swan

song); or, if not, by Tsumori Kunimoto who, though just as

important, isn't as famous. Its initial publication was in Go shu i

shu, a compilation drawn up in honour of Japan's Mikado. Parsi-

fal Ogdan's word-for-word translation of this tanka is, in my

opinion, of an astonishing purity and proportion, particularly as

I was told by a chap from Tokyo's National Library, a man Anton

Vowl had known during his sojourn in Japan, that a tanka always

has 3, 5, 6, on occasion as many as 8, distinct connotations. But,

as Parsifal was to show us, such ambiguity, though crucial to

Japan, to its quaint way of thinking about things, has, for an

inhabitant of Paris or London, no charm at all about it, with

our traditional antipathy to all notions of obscurity, incongruity,

approximation and intangibility. A tanka must boast clarity,

concision, incision, candour, vivacity and unity of thought: in

translation, that's worth any amount of arguably major

omissions. So this is just a translation among many that Ogdan

thought up:

Out of tar-black

In a black tracing

By a point so sharp

Inscribing a sign which isn't black:

O look! an albatross in flight

"Too, too charming," sighs Amaury, "if not too, too illumi-

nating."

"I'm afraid my own contribution risks not advancing us much

in our task," says Olga, following an instant during which, as

though in growing discomfort, nobody says a word. "I say I'm

afraid, for if, in your diary, card and tanka, you found allusions

to a common point, a Void, my manuscript is as lucid, limpid and

unambiguous as yours, Amaury, or yours, Augustus, or yours,

Arthur, was cryptic, allusory and hard to grasp . . _."

"But," says Amaury, "that sounds as if it has a solution for

us . . ."

9 9

ft

Olga won't allow him to finish. "No, no, you don't follow. In

what I'm about to show you, you'll find no sign, no allusion of

any kind. For it's not an original work but a sort of anthology

comprising 5 or 6 works by various hands - various famous

hands, I might add - but containing nothing of any import to

u s . . . "

Now it's Augustus's turn to cut in. "Olga, my darling, has

nobody told you about cutting a long story short? Why don't

you just stick to facts?"

"All right, all right, I'm coming to that. Six days prior to that

odd postcard with its fascinatingly ominous postscript, I too got

mail from Anton - a bulging jiffy bag. And what I found in it

was:

a) a short story by a soi-disant Arago, 'An intriguing tour of our

country'. I was full of admiration for such a charming octavo

with its Arabic motifs and its morocco binding inlaid with gold.

Strictly as a work of fiction, though, it didn't, in my opinion,

amount to much;

b) six highly familiar madrigals, which most of us had to study

at school in our childhood: Anton's painstaking transcription,

word for word, without any annotations, any marginalia at all,

of:

 William Shakspar's 'Living, or not living5 soliloquy

 PBS's Ozymandias

 John Milton's On His Glaucoma

 Thomas Hood's No

 Arthur Gordon Pym's Black Bird

 Arthur Rimbaud's Vocalisations.

"Now and again, in an odd stanza or two, you'll find an illusion

to Anton's hang-ups: obscurity, immaculation, vanishing and

damnation. But I was struck most of all by how random it

was . . ."

1 0 0

"Possibly," says Amaury, "and, again, possibly not! For, if

Anton thought fit to copy it all out so laboriously, it's now our

job to find an indication in it as to his motivation."

Mumbling about proofs and puddings, it's Savorgnan's pro-

posal that only by a thorough study of Anton's transcriptions

will anybody hit upon such a motivation. "And who knows -

you, Amaury, or you, Augustus, or I may spot a crucial missing

link?"

Thus:

L I V I N G , O R NOT L I V I N G

Living, or not living: that is what I ask:

If'tis a stamp of honour to submit

To slings and arrows wafi'd us by ill winds,

Or brandish arms against a flood of afflictions,

Which by our opposition is subdu'd? Dying, drowsing;

Waking not? And by drowsing thus to thwart

An aching soul and all th' natural shocks

Humanity sustains. T is a consummation

So piously wish'd for. Dying, drowsing;

Drowsing; and, what say, conjuring visions: ay, that's th' rub;

For in that drowsy faint what visions may disturb

Our shuffling off of mortal coil,

Do prompt us think again. Of that calamity, to wit,

That is our living for so long;

For who would brook duration's whips and scorns,

A tyrant's wrong, a haughty man's disdain,

Pangs of dispriz'd ardour and sloth of law,

Th' incivility of rank and all th' insults

That goodly worth from its contrary draws,

If such a man might his own last affirm

With a bald bodkin ? Who would such ballast carry,

To grunt and wilt along his stooping path,

1 0 1

But that his horror of th' unknown,

That vast and unmapp'd land to which

No living man pays visit, is puzzling to his will,

Making him shrug off what now assails him

And shrink from posthumous ills?

Compunction thus turns all of us to cowards;

And thus our natural trait of fixity

Is sickli'd through with ashy rumination,

And missions of much pith and import

With this in mind soon turn awry,

And from all thoughts of action go astray.

W I L L I A M S H A K S P A R

O Z Y M A N D I A S

I know a pilgrim from a distant land

Who said: Two vast and sawn-ojf limbs of quartz

Stand on an arid plain. Not far, in sand

Half sunk, I found a facial stump, drawn warts

And all; its curling lips of cold command

Show that its sculptor passions could portray

Which still outlast, stamp'd on unliving things,

A mocking hand that no constraint would sway:

And on its plinth this lordly boast is shown:

"Lo, I am Ozymandias, king of kings:

Look on my works, O Mighty, and bow downI"

Tis all that is intact. Around that crust

Of a colossal ruin, now windblown,

A sandstorm swirls and grinds it into dust.

PBS

1 0 2

ON HIS G L A U C O M A

Whilst I do think on how my world is bound,

Now half my days, by this unwinking night,

My solitary gift, for want of sight,

Lain fallow, though within my soul abound

Urgings to laud th} Almighty, and propound

My own account, that God my faith not slight,

Doth God day-labour claim, proscribing light,

I ask; but calming spirits, to confound

Such murmurings, affirm, God doth not dun

Man for his work or his own gifts, who will

But kiss his chains, is dutijul, his gait

Is kingly. Thousands to his bidding run

And post on land and bounding main and hill:

Tour duty do who only stand and wait.

J O H N M I L T O N

NO!

No sun - no moon!

No morn - no noon!

No dawn - no dusk - no hour of night or day -

No sky - no bird in sight -

No distant bluish light -

No road - no path - no "'tis your right o* way"-

No turn to any Row -

No flying indications for a Crow -

No roof to any institution -

No nodding "Morning!"s on our constitution -

No gallantry for showing us -

No knowing us! -

No walking out at all - no locomotion,

No inkling of our way - no notion -

"No go" - thus no commotion -

1 0 3

No mail - no post -

No word from any far-flung coast -

No Park - no Ring - no door-to-door civility -

No company - no nobility -

No warmth, no mirth, no jocularity,

No joyful tintinnabula to ring -

No church, no hymns, no faith, no charity,

No books, no words, no thoughts, no clarity 

No thing! THOMAS H O O D

BLACK B I R D

Twos upon a midnight tristful I sat poring, wan and wistful,

Through many a quaint and curious list full of my consorts slain -

I sat nodding, almost napping, till I caught a sound of tapping,

As of spirits softly rapping, rapping at my door in vain.

ayTis a visitor," I murmur'd, "tapping at my door in vain -

Tapping soft as falling rain."

Ah, I know, I know that this was on a holy night of Christmas;

But that quaint and curious list was forming phantoms all in

train.

How I wish'd it was tomorrow; vainly had I sought to borrow

From my books a stay of sorrow - sorrow for my unjoin'd chain -

For that pictographic symbol missing from my unjoin'd chain -

And that would not join again.

Rustling faintly through my drapings was a ghostly, ghastly

scraping

Sound that with fantastic shapings fill'd my Julminating brain;

And for now, to still its roaring, I stood back as if ignoring

That a spirit was imploring his admission to obtain -

"Tis a spirit now imploring his admission to obtain -"

Murmur'd I, but all in vain."

1 0 4

But, my soul maturing duly and my brain not so unruly,

"Sir" said I, "or Madam, truly your acquittal would I gain;

For I was in fact caught napping, so soft-sounding was your

rapping,

So faint-sounding was your tapping that you tapp'd my door in

vain -

Hardly did I know you hit it" -1 undid it but in vain -

For 'twas dark without and plain.

Staring at that dark phantasm as if shrinking from a chasm,

I stood quaking with a spasm fracturing my soul in twain;

But my study door was still as untowardly hush'd and chill as,

Oh, a crypt in which a still aspiring body is just lain -

As a dank, dark crypt in which a still suspiring man is lain -

Barr'd from rising up again.

All around my study flapping till my sanity was snapping,

I distinctly caught a tapping that was starting up again.

"Truly," said I, "truly this is turning now into a crisis;

I must find out what amiss is, and tranquillity obtain -

I must still my soul an instant and tranquillity obtain -

For 'tis truly not just rain!"

So, my study door unlocking to confound that awful knocking,

In I saw a Black Bird stalking with a gait of proud disdain;

I at first thought I was raving, but it stalk'd across my paving

And with broad black wings a-waving did my study door attain -

Did a pallid bust of Pallas on my study door attain -

Just as if'twas its domain.

105

Now, that night-wing'd fowl placating my sad fancy into waiting

On its oddly fascinating air of arrogant disdain,

"Though thy tuft is shorn and awkward, thou," I said, "art not

so backward

Coming forward, ghastly Black Bird wand'ring far from thy

domain,

Not to say what thou art known as in thy own dusk-down

domain

Quoth that Black Bird, "Not Again".

Wondrous was it this ungainly fowl could thus hold forth so

plainly,

Though, alas, it discours'd vainly - as its point was far from plain;

And I think it worth admitting that, whilst in my study sitting,

I shall stop Black Birds from flitting thusly through my door

again -

Black or not, I'll stop birds flitting through my study door again -

What I'll say is, "Not Again!"

But that Black Bird, posing grimly on its placid bust, said primly

"Not Again", and I thought dimly what purport it might contain.

Not a third word did it throw o f f - not a third word did it know

of-

Till, afraid that it would go o f f , I thought only to complain -

"By tomorrow it will go off," did I tristfully complain.

It again said, "Not Again".

Now, my sanity displaying stark and staring signs of swaying,

"No doubt," murmur'd I, "it's saying all it has within its brain; That it copy'd from a nomad whom Affliction caus'd to go mad,

From an outcast who was so mad as this ghastly bird to train -

Who, as with a talking parrot, did this ghastly Black Bird train

To say only, 'Not Again.'"

1 0 6

But that Black Bird still placating my sad fancy into waiting

For a word forthcoming, straight into my chair I sank again;

And, upon its cushion sinking, I soon found my spirit linking

Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of Cain -

What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of

Cain

Sought by croaking "Not Again."

On all this I sat surmising, whilst with morbid caution sizing

Up that fowl; its tantalising look burn'd right into my brain;

This for long I sat divining, with my pain-rack'd back inclining

On my cushion's satin lining with its ghastly crimson stain,

On that shiny satin lining with its sanguinary stain

Shrilly shouting, "Not Again!"

Now my room was growing fragrant, its aroma almost flagrant,

As from spirits wafting vagrant through my dolorous domain.

"Good-for-naught," I said, "God sought you - from Plutonian

strands

God brought you -

And, I know not why, God taught you all about my unjoin'd

chain,

All about that linking symbol missing from my unjoin'd

chain!"

Quoth that Black Bird, "Not Again."

"Sybil!" said I, "thing of loathing - sybil, Jury in bird's clothing!

If by Satan brought, or frothing storm did toss you on its main,

Cast away, but all unblinking, on this arid island sinking -

On this room of Horror stinking - say it truly, or abstain -

Shall I - shall I find that symbol? - say it - say it, or abstain

From your croaking, 'Not Again'."

1 0 7

"Sybil!" said I, "thing of loathing - sybil, jury in bird's clothing!

By God's radiant kingdom soothing all man's purgatorial pain,

Inform this soul laid low with sorrow if upon a distant morrow

It shall find that symbol for - oh, fir its too long unjoin'd

chain -

Find that pictographic symbol missing from its unjoin'd chain."

Quoth that Black Bird, "Not Again."

"If that word's our sign of parting, Satan's bird," I said,

upstarting,

"Fly away, wings blackly parting, to thy Nighfs Plutonian

plain!

For, mistrustful, I would scorn to mind that untruth thou hast

sworn to,

And I ask that thou by morn tomorrow quit my sad domain!

Draw thy night-nibb'd bill from out my soul and quit my sad

domain

Quoth that Black Bird, "Not Again."

And my Black Bird, still not quitting, still is sitting, still is sitting On that pallid bust - still flitting through my dolorous domain;

But it cannot stop from gazing for it truly finds amazing

That, by artful paraphrasing, I such rhyming can sustain -

Notwithstanding my lost symbol I such rhyming still sustain -

Though I shan't try it again!

A R T H U R G O R D O N PYM

1 0 8

V O C A L I S A T I O N S

A noir (Un blanc), I roux, U safran, O azur:

Nous saurons au jour dit ta vocalisation:

A, noir carcan poilu d'un scintillant morpion

Qui bombinait autour d'un nidoral impur,

Caps obscurs; qui, cristal du brouillard ou du Khan,

Harpons du ford hautain, Rois Blancs, frissons d'anis?

I, carmins, sang vomi, riant ainsi qu'un lis

Dans un courroux ou dans un alcool mortifiant;

U, scintillations, ronds divins du flot marin,

Paix du patis tissu d'animaux, paix du fin

Sillon qu'un fol savoir aux grands fronts imprima;

O, finitif clairon aux accords d'aiguisoir,

Soupirs ahurissant Nadir ou Nirvana:

O I'omicron, rayon violin dans son Voir!

A R T H U R R I M B A U D

1 0 9

10

Which will finish by arousing pity in a big shot

Having painstakingly run through it, glancing at Amaury,

Savorgnan, Augustus and Squaw in turn, striving to find an obvi-

ous bait, a solid anchor to hold on to, a hook to catch on to, a

hint as to what such-and-such a locution might signify, Olga

sighs, a loud, long, profound sigh of frustration.

"I said just an instant ago that only Champollion would know

how to crack such a conundrum," says Augustus sadly. "But now

I doubt if Champollion could pull it off. A Chomsky might in a

pinch, though."

"Or possibly a Roman Jakobson, who could submit a struc-

turalist's opinion of OzymandiasV

"Why not Malcolm Bradbury!"

"And why not OuLiPo!"

"Baffling, just too, too baffling," Amaury stubbornly murmurs

as though in a world of his own.

"What is?" asks Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan.

"Rimbaud's 'Black A (a blank), ruby I, viridian U, cobalt O':

it's obvious to you, is it not, that it's trying to point us towards

a solution!"

"Why not? If I know anything about Olga's anthology, it's

that not a word in it, not a comma, was put down at random.

But that's Anton Vowl's doing, not Arthur Rimbaud's!"

"Who can say?"

His mind a total blank, his imagination a tabula rasa, Augustus

starts to talk - if almost inaudibly. Rapt in thought, his

1 1 0

companions hang on to his words, which, though at first brist-

ling with abstractions, blown up out of all proportion, soon glow

with an aura of inspiration:

"Black A (a blank). An ambiguity, such as this is, is a major

factor in any a contrario; advancing from that significmt, which

signals ipso facto how important it is first to pinpoint, by chrono-

logically listing, all rival sounds (such actualisation, paradoxically,

proving virtualisation by outwardly confuting it, it's crucial, if

absorbing such a blank in its immaculation, first to affirm its

distinction, its original particularity, its opposition to black, to

ruby, to viridian and cobalt), this 'a blank' thus unfolds motu

proprio out of its own contradiction, a vacant signal of that which

isn't in fact vacant, a blank such as you might find in a book

across which its author's hand inks in an inscription implicating

its own abolition: O, vain papyrus drawn back, unavoidably back,

into its own blank womb; a tract of a non-tract, a nihilistic tract

localising that oblivion huddling, crouching, within a word,

gnawing away at its own root, a rotting pip, a scission, a distrac-

tion, an omission both boasting and disguising its invincibility,

a canyon of Non-Colorado, a doorway that nobody would cross,

a corridor along which no foot would pad, a no-man's-land in

which all oral communication would instantly find, brought to

light, a gaping pit consuming any possibility of a praxis, a bright,

blazing conflagration that would turn anybody approaching it

into a human torch, a spring run dry, a blank word put out of

bounds, a word now null and void, always just out of sight,

always contriving to avoid scrutiny, a word no mispronunciation

can satisfy, a castrating word, a flaccid word, a vacant word con-

noting an insultingly obvious signification, in which suspicion,

privation and illusion all triumph, a lacunary furrow, a vacant

canal, a Lacanian chasm, a cast-off vacuum thirstily sucking us

into this thing unsaid, into this vain sting of a cry arousing us,

this fold wrinkling, on its margin, a mystificatory logic that still

confounds us, tricks us, inhibiting our instincts, our natural

impulsions, our options, damning us to oblivion, to an illusory

111

dawn, to rationality, to cold study, to distortion and untruth,

but also a mad authority, a craving for a purity which would

synchronously affirm passion, starvation, adoration, a substruc-

tion of unfactitious wisdom, of not-so-vain rumours, a human

articulation at its most psychically profound point, as of a

particularly clairvoyant spiritualist, or a saint, or any man not as

moribund as most of mankind. This is what I think. Within a

Logos, in its marrow, so to say, lurks a domain that for us is

off-limits, a zonal injunction that nobody can broach and to

which no suspicion can attach: a Void, a Blank, a missing sign

prohibiting us on a daily basis from talking, from writing, from

using words with any thrust or point, mixing up our diction and

abolishing our capacity for rigorous vocal articulation in favour

of a gurgling mumbo jumbo. A Blank that, for good and all, will

dumbfound us if accosting a Sphinx, a Blank akin to that giant

Grampus sought for many a moon by Ahab, a Blank into which

all of us will go missing in our turn . . ."

Augustus sits down, with a downcast air about him, totally

worn out . . . His companions start ruminating on what was

said.

"Just what I was going to say," murmurs Amaury in con-

clusion, as though intimating that Augustus took such obvious

words out of his own mouth. "Anton Vowl is missing."

"Hassan Ibn Abbou is missing," says Savorgnan.

"Douglas Haig Clifford did his vanishing act all of 20 springs

ago, an ashy furrow dividing his body in two," says Augustus.

"Douglas had on a sculptor's mould," sobs Olga, "to sing

Mozart's Commandant in Don Giovanni."

"Now now," says Savorgnan, "why so gloomy? Think of that

good old song by Francois Danican Philidor: 'All of us must act

in unison, notwithstanding our individual sorrows'. What all of

us must do right now is stop brooding about our missing com-

panions and try to grasp what's going on, so as to ward off any

damnation lying in wait for us, so as to rid us all of this frightful

albatross!"

1 1 2

"How will that occur," sighs Olga, "with this conundrum

baffling us, making us all limp and shaky, in proportion to our

burrowing into it, burrowing down, down to its inmost marrow,

as Augustus put it? Why rush at full tilt towards your own annihil-

ation? Why actually court that ignominious oblivion that was

Anton's lot and Hassan's and Haig's?"

Unanimously finding fault with this outpouring, judging it

just too compliant and timorous, Amaury, Savorgnan and Squaw

try to shout poor Olga down.

But with it soon looking as though it might turn into a

full-blown row, Augustus holds up his hand and, in a flat, monot-

onous drawl that cannot mask his low spirits, says:

"Calm down, amigos, calm down. Do try to control your

sorrow, your anguish, your wrath and your misgivings. You

should try taking to its logical conclusion Arthur Wilburg

Savorgnan's proposition, for, as Malcolm Lowry was wont to

say, 'You cannot catch up with a man who outruns his rivals'."

Consulting his watch, Augustus adds, "Look, it's almost mid-

night, I'm hungry and thirsty. I submit calling it quits, if only

for an hour or so, and rustling up a snack worthy of gustatory

buds as fastidious and discriminating as ours."

"Yum yum," murmurs a gluttonous Savorgnan.

"Unzip a banana," quips a waggish Amaury.

"In fact, a collation awaits you all in our dining room," says

Squaw, whom nobody saw go.

Augustus lightly claps his hands in anticipation, whilst Olga,

with intrinsic, natural sophistication (if that is not an oxymoron),

insists on changing into a formal outfit.

As Olga's will is paramount, our protagonists rush off, arriving

back in a flash, glamorous in glad rags.

Olga (who was, as I say, practically born "in") is a dazzling

vision in a formal Christian Dior pyjama suit of a filmy rainbow

satin, with a billowy flow of charming Victorian knick-knacks,

ribbons and bows, frills and braids, hoods and cuffs, to cushion

1 1 3

its diaphanous opacity. A chunky solid-gold Arab brooch,

portraying an asp, insinuatingly coils its capital S around a wrist

as slight and narrow as an orchid stalk.

Amaury foppishly sports a classic tail coat.

Savorgnan, a dandy, infallibly "with it", has put on a charcoal

tux, a saffron jabot and a fawn cravat. Amaury chirps at him in

grudging admiration.

"My tailor is rich," says Savorgnan in franglais, and with a

slighdy smug grin of satisfaction.

As for Augustus, who as a Consul was known for his ultra-

modish but unshowy chic, his outfit is of a sort which calls to

mind a British major informing Victoria of how wily Johnny

Pathan was drawn into an ambush at a mountain pass in colonial

India.

With "Ooohs" and "Ahhhs" and murmurs of mutual appro-

bation, Olga, Amaury and Savorgnan now walk arm in arm into

Augustus's dining room, which is laid out, thanks to Squaw, as

lavishly as though for a king and his court. A Louis X tallboy

prompts gasps of admiration all round, as also a Burgundy

bow-back chair with Hugo Sambin's stamp on it, a sofa of a

floral motif unmistakably by Ruhlmann and, most notably,

a divan with its own vast, airy canopy. Its attribution to Grinling

Gibbons was thought highly dubious, not to say downright

scandalous, by scholars and buffs, although it did carry his

hallmark.

"Did you know," says Augustus to Savorgnan, "that, sus-

picious of this attribution, and in my opinion righdy so, Warburg

and Courtauld would publish an important monograph of Gib-

bons by Gombrich that was also - though, naturally, only by

implication - a vicious attack on Panofsky?"

"You don't say?" snorts Savorgnan.

"Oh but I do! In fact, I don't mind adding that I actually

thought it would finish in a bout of fisticuffs. Gombrich, though,

who didn't want to fall out with his rival, would admit, in a

1 1 4

tactful Parthian shot, to having found in his slanging match with

Panofsky six major points on which, in an adroit combination,

to ground his first draft of Art and Illusion.''''

"Now it's that kind of information that will maintain your

divan's worth at any auction, Gibbons or not!"

On which prognosis all sit down.

It's no frugal cold-cut lunch that Augustus puts in front of his

trio of companions but a Lucullan orgy of gastronomic, gustatory

and, so to say, Augustatory glory. Its first dish is a chaud-froid of

ortolans a la Souvaroff. No fish, but an homard au cumin for which nothing short of a '28 Mouton-Rothschild is thought apt. To

follow, a roast gigot in onion gravy, its flavour subriy brought

out by a soup^on of basil; and, to accompany that, in conformity

with a tradition at La Maison Clifford (as Azincourt is jocularly

known among Augustus's visitors), a tasty if not too spicy curry.

And whilst this curry is still making its impact, a paprika salad is

brought in, brisding with scallions, cardoons and mushrooms,

zucchini and bamboo shoots. To fill that famous trou normand,

a glass of calvados, naturally, of first-class quality; and, in fitting

conclusion, a scrumptious parfait au cassis with which is drunk a

fruity Sigalas-Rabaud of a sort to bring a sigh of swooning bliss

from Curnonsky.

Proposing a toast, Augustus puts into tripping, flowing words

his vow that "from all our communal labour a solution to this

conundrum that's still baffling us, a way out of this circuitous

labyrinth of which nobody among us has found a ground plan,

will, and in fact must, soon turn up."

Glass clinks against glass. Glass upon glass is drunk. Naturally,

it's all just what you might call social drinking: as soon as Augustus

says, "I'm going to top up my glass", Amaury says, "So shall I."

And Olga. And Savorgnan. And back to Augustus.

It's now long past midnight. Amaury, in a tipsily flirtatious

mood, starts kissing Olga's hand (which, if timid and shaking

slighdy, is not withdrawn from his lips, lips moist and crimson

from a fabulous Armagnac drunk out of a glass of a strikingly

115

rainbowy irisation) and mumbling soft amorous nothings of a

burbling baby-talk intimacy.

Night is slowly fading into dawn. Far off a cock crows. A

mound of Iranian caviar is brought in.

Languidly snuggling up against Amaury, Olga nods off. Augus-

tus, for his part, informs Savorgnan of his participation in a local

rowing championship. Rowing was a sport wholly unknown at

Azincourt, but Clifford sounds anxious to back it, founding an

official Club, actually going as far as making this Club a baptismal

gift of a skiff with which to start things moving, and togging out

a trio of young locals in dark bluish suits boasting coats-of-arms

according to a good old Oxford tradition (at which 'varsity, in his

youth, Augustus had won acclaim as a first-class cox).

It's almost morning as Amaury and his companions finally call

it a day.

Noon rings out. A wasp, making an ominous sound, a sound

akin to a klaxon or a tocsin, flits about. Augustus, who has had

a bad night, sits up blinking and purblind. Oh what was that

word (is his thought) that ran through my brain all night, that

idiotic word that, hard as I'd try to pin it down, was always just

an inch or two out of my grasp - fowl or foul or Vow or Voyal? -

a word which, by association, brought into play an incongruous

mass and magma of nouns, idioms, slogans and sayings, a confus-

ing, amorphous outpouring which I sought in vain to control or

turn off but which wound around my mind a whirlwind of a

cord, a whiplash of a cord, a cord that would split again and again,

would knit again and again, of words without communication or

any possibility of combination, words without pronunciation,

signification or transcription but out of which, notwithstanding,

was brought forth a flux, a continuous, compact and lucid flow:

an intuition, a vacillating frisson of illumination as if caught in

a flash of lightning or in a mist abruptly rising to unshroud an

obvious sign - but a sign, alas, that would last an instant only

to vanish for good.

1 1 6

"How was it?" Augustus now murmurs calmly. "It was. Was

it? It was." It was a solution (or a pardon, or possibly just a form

of compassion) that was flittingly within his grasp but which no

word, no affirmation, of his could magnify into what is known,

simply, as wisdom.

At which point, although not knowing why so insignificant a

fact is having such an impact on him, it abruptly occurs to him

that Jonah, his carp, hasn't had its food - a trivial omission on

his part but also so haunting that, without waiting an instant,

Augustus puts his clothing on whilst mumbling an indistinct

incantation.

Nobody is stirring abroad. Augustus walks to a pantry cup-

board, picks up a handful of grain, of a kind that Jonah is particu-

larly partial to, and abruptly stops, having, in an unlit nook of

his drawing room, on top of an upright piano, caught sight of

that curious black clay box (black from a light coating of Indian

ink) on which, according to Savorgnan, Vowl had paid a first-

class artisan from Japan to paint a tanka. Drawn to it by an almost

morbid fascination, Augustus picks it up and holds it flat in

his hand, staring at Vowl's tanka, a pictographic symbol of an

incomparably finicky calligraphy, and tracing out with a long

almondy thumbnail its insinuatingly squiggly contours.

At which, and totally without warning, a horrifying, inhuman

cry is thrust out of him:

"Ai! Ai! A Zahir! Look, look, a Zahir!"

With his flailing hand caught in mid-air, Augustus falls down

in a fatal swoon.

As it turns out, his cry is so loud, shrill and blood-curdling that

all of his company start up, quickly slip on nightgowns and rush

downstairs, panicking and paling, aghast and cowardly, colliding

with a chair and spilling a goldfish bowl, groping for a doorknob

and finally locating a light switch - Amaury, as usual, arriving

first, with Olga, Savorgnan and Squaw in tow.

Augustus is lying on a giant octagonal rug with Russian motifs.

1 1 7

A ghastly rictus contorts his lips. In its last, dying spasm, his

hand had split Vowl's clay box in half. Around his body is a

random sprinkling of grain.

"Why grain?" asks a dumbstruck Amaury.

"It was for his carp," says Olga, who knows all of Augustus's

funny habits and quirks.

"Uh huh," adds Squaw, "Jonah hasn't had any food for two

days. It was a daily obligation of ours that both of us had lost

track of, what with all that was going on."

"And my hunch is," says Olga thoughtfully, "that, whilst

choosing grain for his carp, Augustus was struck down by a

malady as abrupt as it was mortal, a trauma, a shock, a coronary

thrombosis - who can say?"

"All right," says Savorgnan, "but how do you link his attack

with this box that our poor host was crumpling in his hand

during his final agony?"

"His last word was that . . . that frightful cry," says Amaury

in his turn, "but what was it trying to say? Could any of you

work it out?"

"To my mind it was Traitor, traitor!'" says Olga.

"I thought I could distinguish 'Samar' or 'Zair^" says

Savorgnan.

"No," says Squaw, "what it was in fact was 'A Zahir! Look,

look, a Zahir!'"

"A Zahir?" Olga, Amaury and Savorgnan cry out in chorus.

"Just what is a Zahir???"

"Oh, it's a long, long story," Squaw languidly murmurs.

"But it's our right to know!"

"Okay, if you must know . . . " says Squaw. "But first, why

don't you try to ring up Aloysius Swann or Ottavio Ottaviani,

for only two days ago Augustus had a radiogram from Swann

that said: 'I'm following your situation. It looks bad. What I'm

most afraid of now is foul play. All my suspicions focus on Azin-

court, so both of us must stay on our guard. I must know a.s.a.p.

if your inquiry brings anything to light, as it's only by knowing

1 1 8

what's going on that I can act.' Aloysius Swann has - I should

say, had - known Clifford for many a moon," Squaw adds,

"known, too, about this Zahir affair. So his collaboration is cru-

cial to us."

Amaury calls up Aloysius Swann; but, informing him that

Swann isn't at his station, HQ puts him through to Ottaviani.

"Hallo hallo?" says Ottavio Ottaviani. "This is Ottavio

Ottaviani."

"Hallo hallo?" says Amaury Conson. 'This is Amaury

Conson."

"Amaury? How's tricks?"

"Not so hot."

"Why, what's up?"

"Only an instant ago Augustus B. Clifford 'shuffl'd off his

mortal coil', as our national Bard, our Swan of Avon, put it!"

"Crocus and plum pudding!" growls Ottavio (it's an old

Corsican oath popular among Parisian cops). "Kaput?"

"You said it!"

"A killing?"

"No, no, probably a coronary - but that's only a layman's

opinion."

"Good Lord!" roars Ottaviani. "Okay, now, don't touch any-

thing - I'm on my way. Ciao!"

Ottaviani hangs up. Amaury ditto, saying to Olga, who was

not au fait with this discussion, "Ottavio's coming round.

Pronto."

Augustus Clifford's body is brought into an adjoining drawing

room and laid out on a low divan, with a thin cloak for its shroud.

Upon which Squaw asks his companions to crouch around it

on an oval Iroquois rug and starts to cast a hypnotic old Indian

charm.

"Squaw," Olga murmurs almost inaudibly to Amaury, "cannot

hold forth without first warding off God's wrath by a singsong

chant that no Grand Manitou would sanctify if it didn't go in

1 1 9

association with an imploration and an invocation of, I may say,

a most rigorous liturgy, its ritualisation laid down, on his Clan's

foundation, all of 784 springs ago, by its original Grand Satchmo

(from which word a famous black jazz musician, Louis Arm-

strong, took his alias), so formulating a sort of oral canon which,

passing down from clan to clan, from family to family, ad infi-

nitum, is now part of our cultural patrimony."

"You don't say?"

Thus, in an outlandishly occult jargon that no noncommunicant

could follow, Squaw proclaims Grand Satchmo's oral canon,

announcing, to start with, a total submission to its instructions

and, matching action to words, actually carrying out such instruc-

tions, from first to last in turn, with an assiduity that was a joy

to watch.

"O Grand Satchmo, 784 springs ago, you taught us a mystical

art, that of warding off Grand Manitou's horrifying wrath. Today

I shall act just as you did. First, you did go into a dark wigwam.

You did put down a pouch, unhitch it and draw out a black

tomahawk. Now, on an oval rug, you did lay out six stalks of

buffalo grass, as black as night from a touch of a tarbrush, four

tiny clay pots, out of which you took a light sprinkling of tobacco,

a strip of touchwood and a long, hollow roll of piping. Now,

you did undo a truss of arrows, which was lying diagonally aslant

your rug, honing arrow against arrow until its point was as sharp

as a dart's. Now you did swap your clothing for a pair of buck-

skins and carry out your ablutions. At which, squatting not far

from your rug, a profound tranquillity now filling your soul, you

found that you could pacify Grand Manitou with soothing

words: O Grand Manitou, thou art blind, but thou know'st all

that is to know. I know thy might - as do both hippopotamus

and tapir, gnu and urial, falcon and Vizsla, duckbill platypus and

wapiti, cougar and xiphidon, bison and yak, low-flying albatross

and furry African zorilla with its skin that, curiously, has no

flavour. Today, with my companions, I am about to go forth in

1 2 0

my turn - go forth to absorb an occult and now, alas, outworn

fount of wisdom, to construct, in my skin and in my soul, that

original cry out of which our clans will spring full grown. Grand

Manitou, O archaic Artisan, mount guard, today and always!"

121

10

In which an umbilical ruby avails a bastard's

anglicisation

Falling on all fours, arms stiffly akimbo, brow touching floor,

Squaw abruptly jumps up again and spins round and round and

round.

"Voila," says Olga. "That was Squaw's invocation. Our mission

has found favour with Grand Manitou. Now to find out what

this 'Zahir' is all about."

In Masulipatam (Squaw starts) Zahir was a jaguar; in Java, in

a Surakarta hospital, it was an albino fakir at whom that city's

population had had fun casting rocks; in Shiraz it was an octant

which Ibnadir Shah had thrown into Iran's tidal flow; in a prison

in Istanbul it was a compass found in a pariah's rags, a pariah

whom Oswald Carl von Slatim had thought to touch for good

luck; in Abdou Abdallah's Alhambra in Granada it was, according

to Zotanburg, a stratum of onyx in a moulding; in Hammam-

Lif's Casbah, it was lying in a pit; in Bahia Bianca it was a tiny

notch on a coin.

To know about Zahir, you must apply your mind to an imposing

doorstop of a book that Iulius Barlach brought out, in Danzig,

just as Otto von Bismarck's Kulturkampf was at last drawing to its

conclusion, a book containing a mass of information, including

Arthur Philip Taylor's introductory study in its original manu-

script. Faith in Zahir was born in Islam as Austria's war with its

Ottoman antagonists was winding down. "Zahir", in vulgar

Arabic slang, stood for "limpid" or "distinct"; it was also said 1 2 2

that Muslims had as many as 26 ways of praising Allah - notably,

naming him "Zahir".

At first sight a Zahir looks normal, almost banal: a slightly

wan individual, possibly, or a common, humdrum thing such as

a rock, a doubloon, a wasp or a clock dial. But, in any form it

adopts, it has a truly horrifying impact: who looks upon a Zahir

will not again know Nirvana, blissful oblivion, and will turn into

a haggard raving lunatic.

Alluding first to Zahirs was a fakir from Ispahan, who told

how, many, many moons ago, in a souk in Shiraz, a brass octant

was found "of such craftsmanship that it cast an undying charm

on anybody who saw it". As for Arthur Philip Taylor's long and

thorough monograph, it informs us that, at Bhuj, in a suburb of

Hydarabad, its author was taught a curious local saying, "Having

known a Jaguar .. .", which, if it should apply to an individual,

stood for madman or saint. Taylor was told, too, that Zahir is

common to all kinds of civilisation; in a distant and idolatrous

past, it was a talisman, Yauq; but also a visionary from Irraouaddi

sporting a crown of lapis lazuli and a mask spun out of a

ribbon of gold. Taylor also said: nobody can wholly fathom

Allah.

In Azincourt Zahir was an ovoid crystal of opaloid corundum,

as tiny as a lotus, with a trio of distinct markings on it: on top

a stamp akin to an Astaroth's 3-digit hand; at its midway point

a horizontal 8, traditionally signifying Infinity; at bottom an arc

gaping slighdy ajar, so to say, and finishing in a short, fairly

straight inward strip.

Accompanying Zahir's apparition was a disturbing fact (says

Squaw, continuing). On a spring morning (28 April) a man rang

at our door - squat, swarthy, a bit of a thug, in a whitish grubby

smock, which was, if you want my opinion, a sum total of his

clothing.

"I bin walking all day long," was what this insalubrious indi-

vidual said first. "I'm hungry and thirsty."

1 2 3

"Fuck off, you sonofabitch!" said I, as, frankly, I didn't know

him from Adam.

For an instant all I got from him was a long, hard, hurt look.

Abrupdy, though, as I was about to pick up a club to brain him

with:

"No. I brought a . . . a gift for Clifford."

"What sort of gift?"

"I'm not saying - it's for him to find out, not for you to know."

"Okay, okay," I said, playing it cool, "walk this way. I'll find

out if Mr Clifford's willing to talk to you."

I took him towards a small drawing room in which Augustus

was just finishing his lunch with a satsuma and a slab of Stilton.

"Who is it, Squaw?"

"A vagrant - wants a word - has a sort of gift: for you."

"A gift? Is it anybody I know?"

"I doubt it."

"A ruffian, would you say?"

"No, just a down-and-out."

"Knows who I am?"

"Uh huh."

"All right. Show him in."

As I was announcing him, our visitor was standing half in and

half out, hopping from foot to foot, scrutinising Augustus with

an air that wasn't so much uncivil as almost aghast.

"Augustus B. Clifford?"

'That's right. And might I know who . . . ?"

"I'm nobody at all, not having had any baptism in my infancy.

But I do admit to an alias - an alias that'll charm you, I think,

though you may find it just a tad oudandish: Tryphiodorus. What

do you think of that?"

"Tryphiodorus? It's . . . most original," said Augustus, not

knowing what this was all about.

"Thank you kindly, sir. Now," said Tryphiodorus, calmly going

on as if nothing was untoward, "four days ago, in Arras, a cardinal

- with a blush on his fat mug, I must say, as crimson as his cloak

1 2 4

- said that I should 'go instantly to Augustus B. Clifford at

Azincourt and inform him that a son of his was in our city's

public hospital, wailing away as if h i s - ' "

"A son!" Augustus cut him short, almost falling down on his

rump (his bottom, his buttocks, his bum, his ass or his BT - call

it what you will). "But, for crying out loud, who brought him

in?"

"Alas!" was Tryphiodorus's sigh. "His mama was also dying

whilst giving birth to him, a poor, totally unknown woman. But

a solicitor's affidavit was found in a handbag-"

"A handbag!"

"That's right. With confirmation that this (urn, how shall I put

it?) this fruit of a transitory affair uniting on a night of passion,

8 months ago, at Saint-Agil, Augustus B. Clifford and his mama,

was officially your son."

"What's . . . what's that you say?" Augustus was practically

choking. "A night of passion? But I . . . I insist . . . it's . . . not

. . . not a word of truth in that farrago!"

"Shut up!" said a now intimidating Tryphiodorus, "and look

at this court ruling, instructing you, ipso facto, to bring up your

child."

"A bastard!" was all Augustus could cry.

"But also a Brit," said Tryphiodorus.

Although his initial instinct was to consult his solicitor, Tryphiod-

orus was so insistant that Augustus finally took off for Arras,

compliant if still dubious. In Arras's hospital a plump, rubicund

matron put in his grudging arms a baby clad in a cotton outfit

that was a bit too big for his tiny body. So, making a trip that

would occur again in 20 springs, almost without distinction,

saving that his load would consist not of a baby in swaddling

but a body in a shroud, Augustus sat his offspring down in

his Hispano-Suiza sports car and, driving all night, was back in

Azincourt by dawn.

Starting up at a furious knocking on our door, I ran downstairs

125

to unlock it. Augustus, carrying his child in his arms, was hopping

mad, an ugly rictus distorting his lips, a wild, spasmatic tic caus-

ing his chin to twitch up and down.

"I'll kill him, I'll kill him!" - that was his shrill cry. Why, my

blood ran cold!

"This way, Squaw," Augustus said, briskly now, striding into

his drawing room, brutally hurling his poor, worn-out infant on

to a billiard board, drawing off his swaddling garb, picking up

a poniard and approaching his victim, as Abraham to his son

Isaac, his arm high and fatal. I couldn't stand to watch it. But it

was just as Augustus was about to carry out this inhuman act

that an abrupt transformation was to occur in him. With a look

of profound anguish, this murmur:

"Oh! Oh!"

Approaching, I saw in my turn an oval ruby, as tiny as buck-

shot, with a trio of inscriptions, incrusting his infant's tummy-

button, as if it was a bloody stump of his umbilical cord.

Unmindful of his child's continuing sobs, Augustus took that

oval ruby (not without difficulty) out of its tummy-button, gaz-

ing at it for an instant without saying a word. A thick, suffocating

gurgling sound shook his torso.

"Right," was his first word. "I am willing to confront public

scorn. As this brat truly is my son, what can I do but adopt him?

I'll call him Douglas Haig, thus immortalising that bold and

cunning Commandant with whom I fought at Douaumont. I'll

maintain a constant watch so that nobody will inform him of his

status as a natural child, a bastard. His adoration for his guardian

will stay unambiguously filial."

So Augustus B. Clifford found his Zahir on his own son, who

was to find in him a worthy papa, magnanimous, solicitous and

sagacious. As for that Zahir, it was to form an incrustation on a

gold ring which Augustus would always insist on sporting on

his right hand.

Douglas Haig would soon attain boyhood. Not a day at Azin-

court would go by that wasn't calm and harmonious; not a day,

1 2 6

for six long springs, that wasn't full of joy and good humour.

And, among Azincourt's shrubs, in its plush, lush, luxuriant

grounds, a glowing, coruscating, autumnally purplish crimson

would turn into a warm brown finish a sparkling bluish sky,

across which would blow (God's own natural air-conditioning)

a bracing north wind . ..

1 2 7

10

On a fantastic charm that a choral work by Anton

Dvorak starts to cast on a billiard board

So that (says Squaw) you'll grasp how all our bad luck was born

and out of what it's grown, I'm going to start again from scratch

with a long flashback.

In his youth, Augustus had had (but why? To this day nobody

knows but him) what you might call a moral crisis, a crisis so

alarming that a cousin of his, a naval man, in fact an Admiral,

afraid of his blowing his brains out in a fit of anguish, distraction

or illumination, got him to do a six-month stint on his sloop

"Flying Dutchman", aboard which young Augustus was taught

a harsh but invigorating job, that of cabin boy.

On coming out of his psychological convulsion, which was in

truth so profound that his circumnavigation didn't totally fulfil

its function of curing him, Augustus was to fall for a charlatan

(or quasi-charlatan), Othon Lippmann, who had, as a soi-disant

yogi, a charismatic gift that would transform many of his faithful

into fanatics.

With Augustus pinning his faith on this dubious guru, trusting

him implicidy, worshipping him as a fount of occult wisdom, a

holy pathway to oblivion, to Nirvana, sly Othon Lippmann,

without wasting an instant, sought to act on his minion's child-

ishly candid imagination by forcing him into a total abjuration

of his Christianity, by inculcating him in his own cult, a schis-

matic olla podrida that took as its immortal gods not only Vishnu

and Brahma but Buddha and Adonai, by obliging him, in its

1 2 8





initiation ritual, to study as many as six "holy" books, actually

an unholy mishmash, a ludicrous hocus-pocus drawn up from

Vasavadatta, from Mantic Uttair, Kalpasutra, Gita-Govinda,

Tso-Tchouan and Zohar, and in which you could also find,

thrown in any old how, Saint Mark, Saint Justin, Montanus,

Arius, Gottschalk, Valdo, William Booth, John Darby,

Haggada, a significant chunk of Shulhan Azukh, Sunna, Gholan

Ahmad, Qruti, four Upanishads, two Puranas, Tao-to-King,

Catapathabrahmana and thirty of Li-Po's songs.

An important factor in Othon's cult was its draconian Canon,

imposing on his faithful a host of implorations, invocations,

orisons and unctions.

It also had four purifications a day (at cockcrow, noon, six

o'clock and midnight) and Augustus would carry out his morning

purification in a particularly original fashion. This would consist

of his taking a lustral bath of morning damp - damp which I

had to scoop up from 25 tanks laid out in various locations

around Azincourt's grounds and which an oudandish apparatus

would start canalising into a low, long tub built out of a raw

block of antico rosato, a crystal quartz so hard only an uncut

diamond could polish it.

So that a surplus of irroration harmful to his constitution

wouldn't afflict Augustus, this admission of damp was con-

ditional upon a circuit of automatisation stabilising both its flow

and its constant fluctuations, and calibrating that flow by a hydro-

hoist of communicating airlocks, its oscillation provoking (by

a narrow conduit, that of a cog-rotating piston on a fulcrum

controlling an input-output transistor circuit and its induction)

his apparatus's constriction.

Thus, day by day, dozily crawling from his futon, Augustus

would find a lustral bath of a total, unvarying constancy.

For it, though, to conform to his faith and its laws, Augustus

had to buy a trio of products with which Othon Lippmann would

furnish him at an absurdly high cost:

first, a drop or two of starch, as, containing too much

1 2 9

ammonia, morning damp might risk an obstruction in his throat,

thus making it obligatory to add a soothing lubricant;

also, six grains of albumin, strong in radioactivity, which

Othon would claim had a vigorous purifying capacity (it was in

actual fact a shampoo for phthiriasis, a dubious concoction from

a notoriously unorthodox stomatologist in Avignon who'd

sought to inflict it on that city's public hospital; a prohibitory

injunction was almost instantly brought against it, though, as it

was found to contain far too much aconita; and so it was said

that Othon, coming by this surplus in his usual shady fashion,

found it politic to fly to Tirana - only, on chancing across a

pack of local bandits, to apply his skills to a flourishing traffic in

opium);

finally, day in, day out, Augustus would add to his bath 26 or

25 carats of a product of unknown composition, a product that

was most probably its principal factor, its gist.

Was its impact soporific? or hallucinatory? or hypnotic? To

this day nobody knows. What I can say, though, is that it would

transport him into a condition, a stupor, of almost voluptuous

bliss. As soon as his lustral bath was just right, not too hot, not

too cold, as soon as, in that hairy pink birthday suit of his,

Augustus slowly sank into it for his morning purification, a mon-

strous frisson would run through his body. Knotting a tight

caparison around his brow so that his nostrils would stay dry,

thus avoiding any risk of suffocating in his tub, Augustus would,

in a twinkling, go limp, sluggish, and fall into a coma.

On occasion, as soon as this coma of his would pass, Augustus

was willing to talk about it, about his Nirvana, his fainting fit,

his blissful swoon, his vision of an All-Surpassing Guru, his visita-

tion by an All-Knowing Divinity, his introduction to a profound

and original Fount of Wisdom, to a God Almighty and His holy

Will, his fascination with total Sublimity - in a word, his Illumi-

nation. Numb and catatonic, but - and I'm quoting him word

for word - soaking in Oblivion, bathing in Purity, wallowing in

Infinity.

1 3 0

Until his son's, and thus his Zahir's, irruption into his daily

round, Augustus took his morning lustral bath without fail,

ritually, and also took profound satisfaction, both physical and

spiritual, from it.

But if his Zahir was on his pinky (which, in truth, it always

was, so allowing him constandy to gloat on it, allowing him,

too, to inform anybody willing to pay mind to him that nothing

was as alluring to him as his own mortality), Augustus found

that dunking it, so to say, in his bath would straightaway bring

about an agonising pain in his body, a constantly throbbing itch,

a chafing inflammation, so sharp, stinging and prickly that, not-

withstanding a will of iron, it was soon impossibly difficult for

him to stand it - aching, tingling, vomiting and, in addition,

losing sight of that swooning bliss that was his bath's vital, capital,

cardinal alibi, its primary motivation, its basic goal.

So, racking his brains, Augustus thought up an apparatus

which, akin to that harnass that would maintain his nostrils dry,

would allow him, without too much pain, to sport his Zahir in

his bath; and built a spool-hoist, fitting it out with a jack to

control a maulstick that would float on top.

For fully six springs, by thus avoiding both Scylla and

Charybdis, his morning ritual would go off without a hitch.

From his lustral bath Augustus would draw an invigorating com-

fort as unfailing as it was abundant.

But a day would dawn on which, climbing out of his tub, languid,

clumsy, awkward, still stagnating in his morning Nirvana, Augus-

tus, noticing that his Zahir was now not on his pinky and that a

clot of blood, about as big as a ruby, was coagulating on it,

forming a pallid, oval stigma, as if marking his Zahir's incrus-

tation - a day on which Augustus, I say, crying out in a truly

inhuman fashion, his wits in total disarray, would start pacing

back and forth, back and forth, for four days and four nights,

turning this way and that, haggard and drawn, frantically

unlocking tallboys and cupboards, looking high and low, rum-

1 3 1

maging Azincourt from top to bottom, from rooftops to

floorboards, ransacking its outbuildings, its barns, its courtyard

and its hayloft, raking all its shingly paths.

Four ghasdy days, which a brutal fifth was to cap: Othon

Lippmann's arrival at Azincourt.

Othon, obviously all in, his body giving off a strong musky

odour, his raglan practically in rags, instandy ran towards Augus-

tus with a foul outpouring of profanity, vilifying him, shouting

a long string of disgusting cuss-words at him, almost physically

abusing him.

His command of insults might rival Captain Haddock's in Tin-

tin - "Oaf! Pinbrain! Numbskull! Big fat ninny! Nincompoop!

Halfwit! Schmuck! Moron! Lazy good-for-nothing! Stupid old

fart!"

At which point, Othon hit him hard on his jaw.

With amazing sang-froid, Augustus, thrown for a loop by

Othon's fiilmination, put up a good fight, landing a knockout

blow, a right swing, which had his assailant on his back, groggy,

out cold.

Watching this bout of fisticuffs, Augustus's son, who at that

point was a typically naughty kid of six, had a lot of fun counting

1 . . . 2 . . . 3 . . . up to 10 and finally proclaiming his papa

champion.

But Othon Lippmann was still unconscious. Abruptly triumph

was turning to alarm.

I saw that Augustus was now frantically wringing his hands

and asking in a low, gruff murmur, "What's wrong with him?

Oh, what's wrong with him?"

For his part, Haig, too young to know that a tornado was just

about to hit him, was frolicking around Othon's limp

body, laughing so loudly that Augustus, in a fury, judging his

son's antics unfitting in such a situation, curdy told him to go

away.

"Off with you! Scram!" was his cry, a cry so loud that Haig,

1 3 2

who, until that instant, had found his papa an unfailingly kind

man, took off with a halting, blushing apology. An involuntary

convulsion shook his childish body, causing him not only to burst

into sobs but soil his pants.

So, whilst Haig ran off, trying to pluck up his spirits by sprinkling

grain into his carp's pond, a task that would always amus-

"Hang on a mo," Olga cuts Squaw off in mid-word. "I forgot

about Jonah. Poor thing, it's probably starving."

"Shhh! Shhh!" cry Amaury and Savorgnan. "First, Squaw has

to finish this gripping, fascinating story!"

"Thank you," says Squaw.

So, as I was saying (says Squaw), whilst Haig was nourishing

his carp, I took Othon into an adjoining drawing room, laid him

out on a sofa and got him to swallow a tonic. Augustus and I

took off his raglan and (oh, abomination of abominations!) had

a vision causing us both to panic, causing our blood to run cold,

our hair to stand up in tufts, our skin to go all pimply - a vision

of Othon Lippmann bathing in his own blood. It was as if a

monstrous hawk had flown again and again down on to his torso,

flaying him, ripping off his skin, poking into his lungs, drawing

out his innards, digging into his thorax with its anvil blows.

What I saw in his body was a tiny zoo of vomit-making animals

- gadfly, blowfly, wasp, worm, cockroach, moth - buzzing, hum-

ming, squirming, as gluttonous as carrion crows, on a bloody,

slimy, gassy, putrid magma that stank a yard away!

"Ugh!" says Olga.

"Yuk!" says Amaury.

You said it (says Squaw). In an agony lasting all of six days

Othon would slip into a profound coma, surfacing from it on

occasion only to shout insults at us, accusing us, God only knows

why, of conspiring to kill him, calling damnation down upon us.

I did all I could for him and so did Augustus - hoping that his

dying days wouldn't incur too much fuss or strain. And Othon

1 3 3

did finally pass away, hurling hair-raising oaths at us and, with

his last, rasping gasp, drawing from out of his lungs a cry so

horrifying I instantly had to throw up.

This was, at his burial, Augustus's orison:

"Othon Lippmann  you, my Guru  go straight to God's

kingdom, to that Holy City in which a Houri, a gift to you

from Allah in all His compassion, now awaits you. I was a daily

communicant in that faith that you brought us and taught us so

long ago. Today I am abjuring it, today, tomorrow and for

always. For, with your passing on, what can I do with your faith

but abolish it? And so, with touchwood, will you and I go forth

at midnight."

With that Parthian shot did his orison finish. It was, was it

not, a curious thing to say and, for my part, only his action that

night was to clarify it. Drawing his inspiration from Othon's

own apostolic Canon, amassing and binding up six thick faggots,

Augustus put a torch to his (which is to say, Othon's) body. It

burnt for a day and a half, producing a whitish ash that a whisding

north wind would sow all around us . . .

Nobody, not any of you, can know what anguish and affliction

struck us down at that point. Totally caught up in his sorrow,

his prostration, his apathy, mounting his Golgotha with a Cross

on his back, carrying, too, a giant, flapping albatross of guilt and

mortification, Augustus B. Clifford sank into a torpor.

It was frightful to watch him pacing up and down, all day and

all night, in suicidally low spirits - to watch this man who, as

you know, was a bon vivant, not to say a bit of a gourmand., just nibbling at his food, just picking at his lunch. Notwithstanding

that I would lovingly cook for him all my most subdy scrump-

tious culinary concoctions  aloyau aux oignons confits, turbot au

court-bouillon, a London broil, boudin au raifort, scampi - Augus-

tus got down, at most, an anchovy, a shaving of Cantal, a dash

of Izard, a drop of amontillado, half an apricot or a solitary

walnut  and that was on a good day.

1 3 4

Starting to grow disturbingly thin, occasionally withdrawing

to his donjon, locking its door, not surfacing from it for six

days, although, from within, without warning, and invariably at

midnight, giving out an alarming howl, Augustus would abruptly

turn up again, as if in a stupor, his brow moist and sticky, his

good looks haggard and drawn. In just 12 months his auburn

hair had lost all its colour, transforming him into a grizzly old

fogy.

Haig, a pallid, sickly, timorous boy, an unwitting victim of all

that gloom and doom, was psychologically unfit for this cold,

harsh world of ours, a world in which, if you want to function,

you simply cannot show any pity. Gradually coming to know his

son, snapping out of his nihilistic sloth at long last, disparaging

his past duplicity, his misconduct, his casual abandoning of his

offspring, Augustus finally got down to pray for moral stamina,

so that no guilt, no stigma, should attach to his son for a sin that

was his - which is to say, his own - and nobody's but his.

"I had what you might call an anti-Midas touch," is how

Augustus put it, milking his propitiation for all it was worth. "I

would spoil all that was truly important in my world, and what

I couldn't spoil, what I couldn't corrupt, I would simply forbid.

I know now that I'm going to rot, I'm going to go to pot, in

my insignificant vacuum, in my void - but I will insist that my

son, that fruit of my unruly loins, for whom I affirm, in front of

all that is holy, an undying passion from this day forth -1 insist,

I say, that my son's schooling will start right away, from today,

and it's I who will tutor him. In addition," Augustus finally said

with a sigh, "may I find in this daily obligation my own harsh

but vital salvation."

So Augustus took in hand his son's instruction - an arduous

task as his mind was almost a tabula rasa. It was soon obvious

that his tuition at Azincourt's local grammar school had had

practically no impact on him. Haig, who had an amazingly poor

vocabulary for a lad of 12, had no grasp of orthography at all;

135

was totally lacking in imagination; could do subtraction but not

addition, division but not multiplication; was blissfully ignorant

of Avogadro's Law or, should I say, mistook it for an axiom of

Arago that had nothing at all to do with it; and would gladly

inform you that Louis X was familiarly known at court as Hutin

but had no notion why. As for Latin, although a thick manual

was put at his disposal, it had childishly strict limits: " Animula

vagula blanda", "Aquila non capit muscas'\ "Sic transit gloria

mundi" or "O firtunatos nimium sua si bona norint qgricolas".

Inculcating a satisfying command of basics in his son took a lot

out of Augustus, who, although working hard at it, at all hours,

did, as both tutor and adjudicator, inflict on his ignorant child

a form of schooling that was far too high in its standards,

incongruously abstract in its quality and mosdy much ado about

nothing. Poor Haig would swallow all this waffling, compliant,

smiling and without any sulky ill will; but it was also obvious,

within a month, that such tuition on its own could not, would

not, bring about automatic intuition. To Augustus's dismay, his

son was null in anything touching on maths, philosophy and

Latin, and had, at most, only a faint inkling of Italian and Spanish.

As for linguistics, Haig truly put in a lot of hard work, contriving

to grasp, grosso modo, a host of grammatical, syntactical and

phonic quirks, managing to distinguish - in, say, four words out

of six - a glottal from a labial, a noun from a pronoun, an ordinary

auxiliary from a modal auxiliary, a past from a conditional, a root

from a suffix, a comma from a colon, a surd from a sonant, a

chiasmus from an oxymoron, sarcasm from irony and, finally,

pathos from bathos (and both from Porthos and Athos).

It was frustrating for Augustus (on whom it would quickly

dawn that his original plan to turn Haig into a brilliant physicist

was all in vain) that his own input vis-a-vis his son's vocation

was practically minimal. At which point, forgoing all such

ambitions, it struck him as a surprising but also charming fact

that it was for music that Haig  whom Augustus had caught

1 3 6

on two occasions puffing into a tuba and producing from it a

sound that wasn't wholly discordant - had both a passion and a

gift. Haig had, too, a natural instinct for harmony, a distinct

vocal ability and could sing a song, any song, if it was sung to

him first.

So Augustus, whom Iturbi had taught in his youth, bought a

grand piano (it was a Graf with a slighdy nasal tonal quality but

miraculous pitch, built for Brahms, who would tap out on it, so

it was said, his Impromptu Opus 28) and had it put in a drawing

room in which also stood a billiard board (that billiard board on

which, as I told you, Augustus almost took a poniard to Douglas

as a baby).

Day by day, do mi fab sob, from morning till night, sob fab mi

do, Augustus would drill his son in that gracious art that is sing-

ing, both accompanying and inspiring him. Abandoning his

Latin, his Italian and Spanish, Haig thought only of his passion

for classical music, finding total satisfaction in Mozart, Bach,

Schumann and Hugo Wolf. In truth, not so much Apollo as

Marsyas, his susurration was too squally, his sonority too soft,

his modulation too shaky, his sharps flat, and his pitch simply

off. Augustus's son, in short, sang badly  but was to know,

notwithstanding, a joy in singing that no plummy vibrato could

diminish.

As you all know, at 18, and not without difficulty, Haig sat

his bac\ and, making his mind up at last, taking an autonomous

stand as to his aspirations, stood up to Augustus, accosting him

in that forthright way of his:

"Now that I'm all grown-up, this is what I want to do - sing

at La Scala. It's my vocation!"

"It's a long way from Arras to Milan," said Augustus, smiling.

"Labor omnia vincit improbus," said Haig, who was a stubborn

young man on occasion.

"That's what you think, you big bag of wind," said Augustus.

Haig, who had no gift for humour, got angry at this, stamping

his foot and crying:

1 3 7

"Oh, shut up!"

"Now now, my boy," said Augustus, trying to calm him. "I

was just admiring your obstinacy. First things first, though. You

know, don't you, that if you want to triumph against your rivals

you must put in a lot of hard, slogging work? What kind of

world would you call it if just anybody thought to turn up at La

Scala and ask for a major part in a production?"

"But my plan is to go forward and upward rung by rung."

"If that's so, work hard and I'll assist you as much as I can,"

said Augustus in conclusion.

So, from that day forward, his son did nothing but work at

his vocation - practising sol-fa from cockcrow to dusk.

Now, it was a warm, sunny April morning with spring on its

way. Haig, who was taking particular pains with an oratorio by

Haydn, sat down, flagging, worn out, on that billiard board -

or, should I say, on its rim  that sat stagnating not far from his

piano, stagnating, as I put it, for nobody now had any inclination

to play on it.

Idly, as if simply twiddling his thumbs, Augustus was improvis-

ing on a choral work by Anton Dvorak.

Chancing just at that instant, who knows why, to look at

Augustus's billiard board, Haig saw that part of its dust-cloth,

about a third all told, was going mouldy. All along its margin

was a rash of baffling points, whitish in colour and pica-high (as

in typography), abnormal and anamorphous grains, small, flaky

dots, almost circular and almost uniform. A handful had tiny

incrustations, additions or variations, but all had this quality in

common: a structural organisation that struck Haig as arising

organically out of a conscious plan, a goal that was as obvious

as it was blatant: not a random but a signifying sign (using that

word in its structuralist connotation), partially if not wholly akin

to a manuscript or possibly a quipos (a nodal ribbon, of Incan

origin, that functions as an aid to communication).

But that wasn't all. What was most disturbing was that, as

138

Augustus was happily tinkling away at his Dvorak improvisation,

Haig saw this inscription - which had, by his count, 25 points

to start with - actually, fantastically, almost as if in a vision,

micron by micron, angstrom by angstrom, start to grow. Ignorant

of what his son was up to, Augustus was still playing and would

go on doing so till nightfall; but not for an instant did Haig

abandon his scrutiny of that fascinating dust-cloth, staring at it,

or at a portion of it, as if in a condition of hypnosis; and noting,

as soon as Augustus, running out of inspiration at last, brought

his Dvorakiana to a conclusion with a jarringly atonal chord, that

it now had, not 25, but 26 blank points, an additional point

having burst forth, first as an aura, not so much a point as a hint

of a point, and finally as a rash of whitish grains.

"Papa!" says Haig in a cry of anguish.

"Why, what is it, my boy?" asks Augustus, staring at him.

"Look! Look at that, will you! A Blank inscription on a Billiard

Board!"

"What?" Augustus jumps off his stool. "A Blank on a

Billboard?"

"No, no! A billiard board, on its rim - look, that inscription!"

Crouching to focus on it, his brow knotting, Augustus mur-

murs, softly, dully, "Again! Again! Again!"

"What's wrong?" asks Haig, starting to worry at how livid his

papa is turning.

"You and I must fly, my boy, both of us, right now, straight-

away - pronto!"

1 3 9

10

In which you will find a carp scornfully turning down

a halva fit for a king

Augustus finally thought to acquaint his son of his curious situ-

ation. I was on hand during this discussion.

"Till now I said nothing at all to you about a puzzling con-

undrum accompanying your apparition at Azincourt. Today, if

only I could, I would inform you of just what kind of a Dam-

nation it is that has both of us now in its claws. But a Law (a Law,

my boy, unfamiliar to you) would punish any such injudicious

admission on my part. Nobody, not I, not anybody, would wish

to broadcast that flimsy truth, that X, that minimal unknown





quantity, that total taboo, that is transforming - ab ovo, so to

say  all our talk into poppycock and driving all our actions to

distraction. All of us know of this anonymous abomination that

acts upon us without any of us knowing just how it acts upon

us, all of us know, alas, that, by continually barring our path,

continually obliging us to adopt unidiomatic circumlocutions,

roundabout ways of saying things and dubiously woolly abstrac-

tions, continually damning us to a bogus philosophy and its just

as bogus spiritual comfort, a 'comfort' stifling all our crying and

sighing, sobbing and blubbing - all of us know, as I say, that a

wall far too high for any of us to surmount is now imprisoning

us for good and a malignant wrath is thwarting all our approxima-

tions of that missing sign - quixotic approximations born out of

a natural wish to grasp such an amorphous immaculation in our

hands. So, Haig, my boy, you must know that, from this day

1 4 0

on, as in a not too distant past, Thanatos is in our midst, prowling

all around Azincourt.

' T o start with," said Augustus, "I was optimistic about saving

you from that inhuman fatality to which I was bound hand and

foot. But I know now that I can do nothing for you, nothing.

Thus you must go - for what a miscalculation you would commit,

and I would commit, if, risking your all, you had a notion of

staying on in Azincourt. No, my boy, go you must, and by

nightfall!"

Instandy dismissing this proposition as absurd, and unworthy

of a Clifford, Haig said that his "motivation" was unconvincing

and most probably phony and that Augustus was simply trying

to do away with his son!

Oh, poor Douglas was in a sorry condition, almost touchingly

so. "What! You, too, my own blood! Don't think I don't know

what you want - you want to find my body in a ditch, don't

you? God, I was so trusting, I put my faith in you, I would look

up to you with a truly filial admiration - and now I find you

hatching a plot against your own son  a plot as brutal as it's

stupid! And so goddamn obvious it wouldn't fool a child! Don't

you know what candour is? If you truly want to abandon your

own offspring, cry, shout, pull his hair out if you must, but don't

try to justify your cowardly act with such an idiotic alibi!"

"My boy," said Augustus with a groan, profoundly hurt by

such an insulting slight on his honour and probity. But his words

got lost in an uncontrollably loud burst of sobbing.

That night I found out from him that it was his wish to blurt it

all out - that Augustus, in short, if only for an instant, was willing

to inform Haig of his status as a bastard, inform him of Zahir,

of Othon Lippmann, and of Tryphiodorus in his grubby smock,

and of his lustral baths, and so on, and on. But that took guts,

and his valour would finally fail him.

Without saying a word, Haig took a long, last look at his papa;

and, making an abrupt U-turn, ran off out of his sight.

141



I had to know if Augustus, who stood stock still through all

of this, was going to call him back - or if I should.

"No." It was almost his last word on this unusual family drama.

"Drop it, Squaw. Haig must go - thus Haig will go."

"And if Haig won't go?"

"Too bad - it's curtains for all of us!"

All that night Haig would go pacing upstairs and downstairs,

along this corridor and that, into this room and out of that,

through library and study, attic and pantry. Till, finally, at dawn,

Augustus and I (spying on him, I admit) saw him go out, sporting

a woolly cardigan and a thick parka and carrying a small bag in

his hand.

First strolling around Azincourt's grounds, Haig found his way

at last to Jonah's pond, stood thoughtfully for an instant on its

rim and got down on all fours, whisding as follows

which was obviously a signal, as Jonah instandy swam up to join

him. Haig had a long talk with his carp, if I may put it that way,

whilst flipping an occasional pudding crumb at it - crumbs idly

ground up in his hand just as you might grind flour.

And at that point, noisily slamming Azincourt's wrought-iron

portals, and without so much as a last backward look at his papa,

or at yours truly, Haig slowly shrank out of sight. . .

Not out of mind, though. Not knowing his son's location or

situation was driving Augustus crazy. Nor did Haig's carp swim

up if any of us thought to approach its pool, murmuring, "Jonah

. . . Jonah . . ." Augustus and I had hit rock bottom.

Until, that August (this was in March), a postman, knocking

at our door, brought us a most curious communication. Slicing

its top with a pair of scissors, Augustus's initial instinct was to

find out who it was from.

1 4 2

"Hmm. Anton Vowl? Do you know of any such individual?"

"No . . . I can't say as I do."

"Nor I. But this Vowl claims to know all about us. Look at

this."

My Lord,

In April I ran into Douglas Haig Clifford on about six

occasions. Having found out, fortuitously, about his taking flight

from Azincourt, giving you no hint as to his comings and

goings, I thought it my duty to furnish you with a handful of

indications which - such, anyway, is my wish - may aid in

mitigating your all too natural anguish.

On his initial arrival in Paris, Douglas's conduct wasn't

at all, I'm afraid, what you would call morally uplifting:

crawling from bar to bar, from clip joint to clip joint, usually

hanging out with a trio of individuals from a notoriously

slummy, insalubrious part of town - infamous blackguards,

outlaws as unafraid of man as of God, with a long and bloody

history of criminal activity. As if finding an almost diabolic

fascination, a sort of kinky charm, in corruption, your son

took part in hold-ups from which all profits would go to his

unscrupulous pals. It almost brought about his downfall: caught

with his hand rummaging in a lady's bag, Douglas's boss, his

Fagin, if you wish, was run in and would languish for many

months in prison.

A poltroon if not a coward, anyway a bit of a milksop,

your son saw a distinct possibility of his also rotting in jail, a

possibility that wasn't at all to his liking. So, moving out of

that casbah of corrupt cops and cutthroat crooks, Douglas took

a maid's room on Boul'Mich. It didn't boast all mod. cons, but

it had a kind of comfort that was, shall I say, succinct. I don't

know what his bank account was at this point or just how such

a capital had grown. Douglas didn't own a car, but ran up

a colossal bill at his tailor's. His famous sports shirt - which

had, as its "mascot", not an alligator but a tiny portrait of

143

Djougachvili - was, as soon as worn, familiar and

ultra-familiar from Parish Quai Conti to its Club 13, from

Pont Sully to Lipp. In addition, Douglas would follow fashions

maniacally, going to talks by McLuhan on sociology, Lacan on

psychoanalysis and Foucault on philosophy, going to films by

Godard, Truffaut and Chabrol, plays by Anouilh, Giraudoux

and Duras.

All this was to last a month at most, until Douglas,

without a sou, saw that things had got out of hand, that his

riotous high-living was taking its toll, that his physical

constitution was going to pot and that his companions thought

of him as a promiscuous good-for-nothing.

It was at that point that, with his customary brio, your

son took as a political goal - a goal just as transitory as it was

radical - that of transforming his country's social status quo

by abolishing Capital and outlawing Profit. Douglas was a

militant in an "ultra-Albanian" (sic) party which, drawing

practically all of its inspiration from a talk by Hoxha in

Shkodra (or, traditionally, Scutari) about four months ago,

would attack, without discrimination, official Communist

policy and unofficial Maoist ravings. This ultra-Albanian

party, though, didn't last too long. To his chagrin, it took

only six days for it to split up.

At that junction it would dawn on him that, in his

childhood, his papa - you, in short - had casually said to him,

"You know, Albinoni's adagio was so comforting to us at cousin

Gaston's burial", and that a basic motivation for having sown

so many wild oats was to damp down what you might call his

subliminal ambition, his truly instinctual goal, in this world -

singing!

And, my, did your son work hard at music from that

point on! It took him just a month to sign up for a class at

Paris's famous Schola Cantorum, which, I must say, was

mightily struck by his gifts.

Today Douglas is living, if you can call it living, in a

1 4 4

tiny, spartan studio flat, six rond-point du Commandant

Nobody.

Thus, straying but an instant from a straight-and-

narrow path, your son is now assiduously pursuing his

vocation.

This information will aid, I trust, in taking a load off

your mind, a load which, from that day on which Douglas took

to flight, has lain so painfully hard upon you.

Tours truly,

Anton Vowl

Without waiting, Augustus thought to forward to his son a sub-

stantial cash sum, dispatching with it a long communication - a

saga of sorts - that would amply justify his conduct. But nobody

would pick up his cash; and, wishing to find out why, both

anxious and suspicious, Augustus paid a visit not only to Paris's

main postal administration, which told him that no Douglas Haig

Clifford was living at six, rond-point du Commandant Nobody,

but also, naturally, to that Schola Cantorum at which Anton

Vowl had said Haig was studying, inquiring at its administration

if it had a Clifford in any class. On this occasion his luck was in:

Augustus was told that his son was on its list; but was also told

that, coming top of his class in unison singing, Haig had just

flown off to Manhattan's Juilliard School of Music, to study

composition.

Six months go by. Things finally start to calm down. From a

criticism in his Figaro Augustus saw that Douglas had won round

Carignano's intimidating public. Longchamp, a famous musi-

cologist, had him "bound for instant stardom", whilst Gavoty,

his rival, thought of him as "tomorrow's Tito Gobbi". And that

was just in Paris: Hugh Canning, an important British critic, was

to call him a "Gigli with Kim Barg's vocal gifts, Ruffo's passion

and Souzay's intuition".



* * *

145

Now - it was on a Friday, if I'm not wrong - having bought

that day's provisions and arriving from town with, in tow, an

urchin whom I paid a franc or two, to carry a particularly volum-

inous shopping bag - I saw, strolling nonchalandy around our

pond, a man with an air about him that I found just a bit dis-

turbing as, for an instant, I actually took him for Haig. In fact,

as you probably now know, it was Anton Vowl.

Vowl, tall, as straight as a capital I, as slim as a strand of hair,

clad in a panama hat and a drab plastic mac with a tartan collar,

carrying a stick and looking about 20 at most, was, at first sight,

nothing but a normal, charming youth, but a faint hint of - oh,

how shall I put it? - a slightly indistinct, out-of-focus quality

about him instandy put you on your guard. His curious skin

colouring, giving his bulging brow a sickly cast, his languid gait,

half-lurching, half-undulating, his shifty look, his rabbity lash-

bound iris so limpidly bluish I thought I was looking at an albino

- all in all, I saw a kind of twitchy agitation in him which I

found highly anxious-making, as if this poor man was carrying

a cumbrous physical or psychological cargo within him.

I stood in his way, haranguing him according to a traditional

old tribal custom.

"How! Ugh! Man of whitish skin! May your wigwam know

only harmony, may you bury your martial tomahawk, as I shall

bury my own, and may you not talk in fork'd words, for nor

shall I! Now you and I must powwow."

"Ahiyohu," said Vowl, touching his brow with his right thumb

and flicking it against my brow just as a Mohican would, thus

showing his familiarity with our customs. "May a fat and juicy

caribou sit roasting in your cauldron!"

I brought him in, inviting him to sit down and ringing a gong.

In an instant Augustus stood in front of us, saying, "What is it?"

"Anton Vowl," said our visitor with a curt bow. "Last

autumn. . ."

Augustus gruffly cut him short. "I know. Last autumn you

told us all about my son's dissipation, his crazy 'political' activism

1 4 6

and, thank God, his finally choosing a vocation and sticking to

it. Haig, or so I'm told, is at last making his way in this harsh

world of ours, and in Turin, just four days ago, got a standing

ovation in Tristan. It was my wish, you know, to thank you for

your aid, but I had no notion at all as to how I might contact

you. I found no information of that kind on your communication

to us."

A sigh from Anton. "Alas, Mr Clifford, I simply forgot to add

it - a thousand pardons. But, fortuitously passing through this

district, not far from Azincourt, I thought I'd drop by and say

hullo."

"By gad, I'm mightily glad you did!" said Augustus. "If you

don't mind, though, I'll call you Anton from now on - and you,

I trust, will drop that formal 'Mr Clifford'. Just Augustus, all

right? That should simplify things, don't you think?"

"As you wish . . . Augustus."

"Good. Now can I talk you into joining us in a light but

satisfying collation tonight?"

"Hmm, I won't say no."

First putting down his stick, Vowl took off his panama hat

and his mackintosh.

"Now," said Augustus, "why don't you and I pop into my

smoking room for a drink, a cigar and a chat. What do you say,

Anton?"

Coming out into a dark hallway, walking down a narrow corri-

dor and climbing up six stairs, Augustus brought Vowl into

a room with a pair of cosy armchairs in black Morocco and

shiny mahogany, giving him a thick Havana, and not a phony

but a first-class product, as I can vouch, of Cuba's tobacco

plants.

Vowl took a long puff on it, luxuriously savouring its odour.

Proudly showing off all his barman's apparatus, Augustus put

it to him: "A whisky? Scotch? Irish? Bourbon?"

"Hmm . . ." Vowl said doubtfully.

"A gin and tonic? A cocktail? A Bloody Mary? Or possibly just

1 4 7

a Virgin Mary? That's without any vodka, you know. No? A Bull

Shot? A Tom Collins? A dry martini?"

"Actually, you know what I fancy? A blackcurrant drink."

"A kir? Naturally."

Clink-clink.

"Bottoms up."

"Skoal."

"Chin-chin."

At which point, having drunk his kir, Vowl said:

"Now, what you want to find out most of all is how I got to

know your son. Voila. It was a day on which I was idly strolling

around an aquarium - you know, in Paris's Jardin d'Acclimat-

ation. A youth clad in a black cloak, low in spirits, visibly down-

cast, a youth whom you might think of as my own kith and kin,

stood with a curiously languid air, not far off, gazing down into

a pool in which a shoal of carp was swimming about. Out of a

plastic shopping bag this lad brought a funny-looking foodstuff,

part-halva, part-loukoum, that sat crumbling in his hand until it

was thrown to any fish daring to snatch it, notwithstanding con-

stant complaints from a guardian who, on four occasions, would

approach him, yapping at him and snapping at him and pointing

with a shaky, nicotiny hand to a signboard prohibiting visitors

from giving any food to animals, birds or fish.

"It was almost as if this poor boy was waiting in actual anticipa-

tion of a carp rising up and hopping out of its liquid habitat,

just as would a dolphin, to grab a crumb in mid-air. But no carp

did hop out, a fact that cast a pall on his spirits.

"I finally thought to accost him, talking to him of his poignant

but, from what I could work out, totally solitary passion for fish,

carps in particular, which brought from him a frank admission

that in his past, among many casual companions, his only bosom

buddy, so to say, was Jonah his carp, which would swim up on his

murmuring 'Jonah . . . Jonah . . .' or his whistling a complicitous

fishy signal. Not a day would pass, so I was told, without his

carp catching a crumb or two out of his hand, without Douglas,

148

if at all downcast, taking Jonah as his confidant - Jonah, who

wouldn't fail to wink back at him amicably.

'Today, said Douglas, lost in his thoughts, too candid for his

own good and, frankly, just a tiny bit crazy (but his almost sui-

cidal mood was an obvious product of his affliction), it was his

waif conviction that a carp from this Jardin d'Acclimatation would

swim up and (why not?) flick its tail at him in a cordial salutation.

And so, with his last franc, your son had bought a pound of

halva, a sticky concoction for which Jonah had always had a

gluttonous passion, particularly so if it was, as now, royal halva,

Shah's halva, as Iranians call it - of a quality found only in first-

class shops, Fauchon in Paris and Fortnum & Mason in London.

"Brought low in my turn by his sorrowful mood, I stood him

a drink and a ham sandwich in a local snack bar. Douglas was

hungry all right: watching him gulp his food and wash it down

with a Coca-Cola, I thought of a Muslim coming out of

Ramadan, a Ramadan just a tad too long and drawn-out for

comfort.

"Whilst sipping my cappuccino, I was told by your son all I

was avid to know about his work, about his vocation, about you,

Mr Clifford - oh pardon, I should say Augustus - and about

Squaw..."

Augustus, his brow moist with anticipation, cut him off. "What

did Haig say? Was my poor boy conscious of that curious taboo

surrounding his birth?"

"I'm afraid so, old man. Unknown to you, as a child of six,

Douglas - or Haig, as you call him - had caught you on a

fatal morning in his childhood in that soothing, drowsy-making

caldarium in which you lay flat out, cut off from all human con-

tact, in your lustral bath, sinking into Nirvana, murmuring, only

half-consciously, a rambling glossolalia so intriguing to a child's

imagination that, approaching you, Douglas stuck his auditory

organ against that harnass, or its clasp, that you'd put on to hold

you in position, a clasp that, according to him, had a strong

amplifying capacity . . ."

1 4 9

A groan from Augustus: "Ah capiscol capiscol"

"That's right, Augustus, now you know. You unwittingly told

your son all about it. You told him about Zahir, about that

mystical scab in his umbilical cord. And, his wrath against you

brought to its boiling point, a wrath making him as strong and

vicious and unforgiving as a lion - what am I saying? a wrath

driving him almost out of his mind - it was Douglas who would

pull his Zahir off your pinky!"

"So provoking that damnation that's pursuing us to this day!"

"Right again," said Anton Vowl. "Douglas, as I say, was six

at most, but it had all sunk in. Cursing you with all his childish

brio, from now on your son would rancorously hound you, rap-

turous to find you falling, to find things going badly for you,

and in agony, by contrast, if your luck was starting to turn. His

loathing of you was constant - nay, undying!"

"My God! Oh my God!" Augustus was now loudly sobbing,

as if in convulsions, and twitchily crumpling a hanky in his hand.

"Your son's fulmination against you, bastard as Douglas is,

British as Douglas was, is intact to this day. What your son did,

all of it, including his vocation, was part of a monstrous plot

thought up by him to bring about your doom!"

"His vocation?" said Augustus in an anxious murmur. "I'm

afraid I don't follow . . ."

"Which is why," said Vowl chillingly, "I was in such a hurry

to catch up with you."

From his black chamois-bound bag Vowl took a charcoal draw-

ing, not unskilful in its way, of that Uomo di Sasso, clad in an oval

plastron of pallid stucco, who would punish Don Juan not so

much for having slain him as for going so far, committing an act

so sick, as to ask him to lunch. Think, if you will, of a gigantic

Humpty Dumpty.

On its back, in Douglas's handwriting, was a disturbing prog-

nosis: "Augustus, too, is in for it at my apparition, for my blood

is a blot on his honour!"

"This," said Anton Vowl, "is what Douglas would hand in at

1 5 0

my club four days ago. With it was a card announcing that your

son was living in Urbino, singing you-know-who in Don Giovanni

and planning to marry Olga Mavrokhordatos . . . "

I saw Augustus jump up, as if stung by a wasp.

"No! No!" was his cry. "Haig is hurtling to his own dam-

nation!"

151

IV

OLGA

M A V R O K H O R D A T O S

15

In which, untying a long string of fabrications and

falsifications, you will find out at last what sank

that imposing Titanic

"No! No!" was Augustus's cry, as I say. "Haig is hurtling to his

own damnation!"

"Abyssus abyssum invocat\" was Anton Vowl's gloomy con-

clusion.

But as Olga, in a turmoil, is sobbing, almost fainting, Arthur

Wilburg Savorgnan cuts short (as abruptly, in truth, as with a

pair of scissors) Squaw's rich, insinuating narration.

"Ah, such trials and tribulations," says Savorgnan, "and no

solution in sight. Douglas Haig 20 springs ago, Anton Vowl a

month ago, and now Augustus - kaput, struck down by a

cunning form of malignancy that's still prowling around us, a

malignancy which also struck at (for why not? who knows?)

Hassan Ibn Abbou, Othon Lippmann and that poor, unknown

woman who brought Douglas into this world . . ."

"All our sons, saving only Yvon," sighs Amaury Conson.

"But," adds Savorgnan, "isn't it so that all of us now approach

our goal? Can't all of us now grasp its principal factors? What

Squaw has just told us, omitting nothing, not a word, not a fact

- didn't it contain a prodigious opportunity for us to find a way

out of this abomination that's pursuing us?"

"But Douglas didn't know my family background!" Olga

abruptly affirms.

155

"Douglas didn't know it, that's right," says Squaw, continuing,

"nor did you. But Augustus did know it and instantly saw how

important it was:

Of Turkish origin, mainly from Istanbul, living in a palatial

mansion giving out on Thanatogramma and Ailippopolis, this

Mavrokhordatos family (or Mavrocordato or occasionally Maur-

ocordato: its connotation, in a Balkan patois so unknown it's

thought by Saussurian linguists to contain an occult anagram-

matic capacity, is "clad in black armour" or "skilful in black

magic"), this Mavrokhordatos family, I say, would initially fur-

nish its nation's Sultan with a host of loyal icoglans (or vassals).

Thus Stanislas Mavrokhordatos's job was shaving Suliman. Con-

stantin was Ibrahim's doctor. Nicholas was a tardjouman (or

dragoman, as is said nowadays) who, for his particular patron,

Abdul-Aziz, would amass a million or so manuscripts, most

bought at a discount and all glorifying Islam. And his son, Nich-

olas junior, was Hospodar of Banat. In fact, it was said that

Abd-ul-Hamid would hold nothing back from him, for Nicholas

had a truly amazing gift for linguistic obfuscation and would

turn an innocuous communication into such hocus pocus that

nobody could follow it, notwithstanding many signs proving

that his calculations or translations had sprung from an old and

aboriginal canon.

Nicholas, who took as his coat-of-arms a burning Sphinx, was

his patron's right-hand man and had a vision of rising at court

to a rank of Vizir or Mamamouchi. All too soon, though,

Mahmoud III, furious at his Hospodar for usurping so much

authority, and mortally afraid of his laying down his law as far

as Stamboul, summarily got rid of him, whilst commanding his

troops to round up Nicholas's family and submit it to mass cruci-

fixion.

But, sustaining many hardships, that family of yours, Olga,

would cunningly slip through Mahmoud's hands. Arriving at

Durazzo, Augustin, your grandpapa from way, way back, all in

1 5 6

from so much roaming about, thought it a good town in which

to start up as a notary and was soon publishing a monthly journal

notorious for promoting insubordination vis-a-vis his nation's

Sultan. "Albanians," ran his most famous proclamation, "a vic-

torious day will dawn! Kill all tyrants! Hold high a flag dripping

with Ottoman blood! Plough your furrows in it! And march,

march, march!"

Such agitation shook Durazzo to its foundations. Six oustachis

lay slain. "Down with Turks!" or "Down with Islam!" - this cry

was ubiquitous. Its flag was a gonfalon of whitish organdy with,

on its right-hand canton, just that flaming Sphinx that Nicholas

had had as his coat-of-arms. A national political party, Whiggish

in inspiration but anarchistic in its vocation, got busy mobilising

public opinion in its favour; and a man, Arthur Gordon, a distant

cousin of Byron, so it was said (and, as Byron was, both British

and a hunchback), would start galvanising an opposition to it,

composing a National Hymn that was sung by anybody willing

to stand up to a yataghan.

It took thirty-six months to rid Albania of its Ottoman mon-

archs: signing a pact at Corfu, it was to gain its autonomy at

last. Instantly arguing with Cavour about submitting this bud-

ding nation to a quasi-tutorial form of authority, Victoria would

appoint as Consul to Tirana Lord Vanish, a brilliant alumnus of

Oxford for whom Richard Vassall-Fox, third Lord Holland, was

an unofficial sponsor, introducing him at court and fully support-

ing him in his nomination. This Lord Vanish slyly sold Augustin

Mavrokhordatos, who had nothing but admiration for Victoria,

an official British policy of a colonial or half-colonial status as

most apt for Albania, worn out by Turkish domination and totally

unfit for "automancipation"; adding that it was thus important

to allow Britain to act quickly, whilst holding out, to any local

political faction suspicious of its assuming a quasi-dictatorial

authority, a possibility of participating in its civil administration,

and so gradually making Albania a dominion. But it all had

to go quickly, for, if not, it was obvious that Abyssinia or

1 5 7

Austro-Hungary or untrustworthy Italy would jump at such an

opportunity. Won round by Vanish's sophistry, Augustin put

into action a fairly crafty plot. British gold would flow into

Albania. Collaborationists would occupy crucial positions. Third

columnists would go foraging for information, or frankly digging

for dirt, in bistros and poolhalls. A plan of attack of an astonishing

sophistication was drawn up. But, with just two days to go to

D-Day, with a battalion of hussars loyal to Britain languishing

in an army camp in Brindisi, awaiting a signal announcing a total

invasion, manu militari, of Albanian national soil, Augustin was

caught out as a conspirator. A slip-up? A partisan talking off-

guard? A turncoat changing his mind? Or a traitor, a Judas,

informing on his companions-at-arms for thirty coins? Who

knows? It was all so long ago. What I can say, though, is that it

was to prompt an unholy commotion, for nobody in this world is

as chauvinistic as an Albanian. Furious crowds brought thirty-six

public officials to a kangaroo trial, found all thirty-six guilty,

rightly or wrongly, of participating in Augustin's coup, and

strung all thirty-six up on a gigantic scaffold.

As for Augustin, it would finish badly for him: first, a tanning

from a cat-o'-9-tails; following this, two days stuck in a pillory,

with half of Tirana's population cursing him, mocking him, hurl-

ing rotting fruit at him and urinating on him; now an iron clamp

was put around his throat; his skin was cut up in a thousand

ways; a gag was stuck into his mouth right down to his larynx;

finally, surviving asphyxiation, immolation and dowsing with

alcohol, his body was put alight.

Thanks (although "thanks" is hardly an apt word for so atro-

cious a plight) to his outstandingly robust constitution, Augustin

took about a month to succumb. His carcass was thrown to a

pack of wild dogs; but by that point it was so putrid no animal

would touch it.

In Durazzo, things would go almost as badly for all 26 sur-

vivors of Augustin's family. A hunt was on, with rabid nationalists

out for its blood, looting its mansion on four hair-raising

158

occasions, gang-raping Augustin's poor old granny and mass-

acring his sobbing infants.

It took such fanatics just six months to track down and kill all

but a solitary Mavrokhordatos, a Mavrokhordatos, though, so

significant to Albania as a living symbol of his family's past insub-

ordination that his antagonists would go so far as to award a

million hrivnas to his captor. For this survivor was a first fruit

of Augustin's own vigorous loins: his son Albin (ironically, nam-

ing his son so patriotically was Augustin's own wish!).

Miraculously, though, Albin got out of Tirana by night and,

hiding out in a thick, dark, almost fairy-story wood, would lan-

guish in it for all of six springs and six autumns, a half-moribund

survivor, stoking up his loathing for that Albanian tyrant who

had slain his family but also, possibly primarily, for that British

aristocrat who, to his way of thinking, had drawn his poor papa

into a fatal trap.

But a day was to dawn on which, in a forlorn marabout, its

only, and occasional, visitor a farm boy with four mangy goats,

Albin dug up a stash of diamonds, gold doubloons and ingots.

And, in an unwitting imitation of Mathias Sandorf, using this

colossal capital to obtain satisfaction from his family's assassin,

Augustin's son would round up a gang of outlaws, which was

lavishly paid, as much as fifty-fifty a job, so that its loyalty to him

was total.

For his principal lair a rocky fjord was found that his gang

would punningly call "Fillbag Fjord", as Fra Diavolo, a Fran-

ciscan bandit who would hold up landaus and mail wagons and

fill his voluminous bags with booty, had had occasion to pass a

night or two on its banks.

Initiating a conscript into his gang, Albin first brought him to

his fjord, commanding him to drink six straight vodkas in a row.

Having drunk his fill, this conscript took an oath on a crucifix,

promising to do Albin's bidding right up to his final hour in this

world. At which point Albin would tattoo on his right wrist -

with a scratchy gold nib that would imprint a narrow whitish

1 5 9

striation along a man's skin, not drawing blood but so sharp that

no amount of chafing could rub it out - an occult symbol that,

as it turns out, an Albanian cop got a look at during a raid,

although his drawing of it was so clumsy that nobody could

work it out. It was in fact circular in form with a dash running

horizontally across it; or, putting it simply, it wasn't dissimilar

to that signpost stopping cars from going along a particular road.

On occasion an outlaw was caught; and his captors had no

doubt at all, notwithstanding that our Albanian cop's drawing

was fuzzy and indistinct, that a curious whitish symbol on his

wrist was proof of his links with Augustin's diabolic son. In six

springs, though, a trio of his companions, at most, was caught

in this way, whilst Albin had around thirty oudaws, on and off,

at his disposal!

His cohorts would mainly attack official visitors from Britain.

That nation's consul in Tirana saw his mansion blown up again

and again, and any yacht flying a Union Jack in Durazzo harbour

ran a risk of rotting in it for good.

As for Cunard's famous Titanic, if it sank - or, should I say,

was sunk  it was on account, not of any ghasdy glacial collision

by night, but (and this is no myth but a fact I'm willing to

vouch for) of Albin's misdoing, for on board ship, discussing a

possibility of constructing a gigantic rolling mill in a suburb of

Tirana, was an important Anglo-Albanian consortium with capi-

tal from Barclays Bank.

A busy train colliding with a coach, in Quintinshill, a town

not far from Hamilton, halfway from Huntingdon to Oakham,

on 6 August 1918, was proof for Scodand Yard (which instandy

got into a panic) that Albin could actually, if such was his fancy,

attack his rival within his own country. But it was not known at

first that his motivation in carrying out such acts was just for a

bit of fun, or, in his own words, "for a holiday", as, for all his

banditry, it was his custom to insist on a month off in six, going

to Britain, a country that was an abomination to him, for its rain

- soft, drizzly rain that was soothing to his unhappy soul.

160

His action finally driving his British antagonists out of Albania,

in 1919 Albin would turn on his compatriots, making raids on

shops and banks; but, in a country still without any form of

industrialisation, his pickings would usually amount to a handful

of scrawny, hungry lambs for which nobody would pay a ransom.

His capital was dramatically low and his day-to-day bankroll was

now starting to contract.

Not far from Fillbag Fjord, though, was a canyon in which .

would grow in profusion a strain of poppy found only in Albania.

Noting it instantly, and righdy too, as an opportunity for making

colossal profits, Albin found out from a compliant pharmacist

how to turn it into laudanum and, by fumigating that, would

obtain a satisfying form of opium.

Now, as anybody who knows will inform you, opium isn't

worth a brass farthing if you can't control its distribution. And

though such a circuit of distribution was in position, starting

from Ankara, going on, Balkanwards, via Kotor, Dubrovnik or

Split, to Rimini, and from Rimini to Milan, a major crossroads

for all this flourishing traffic, it was a multinational or possibly

supranational organisation (consisting of thirty "big shots" who

would appoint its Mafia, its Cosa Nostra, including Lucky

Luciano, Jack "Dancing Kid" Diamond, Big Italy, Bunny "Gun-

fight" Salvatori and so on, plus six minor affiliations of various

rankings) which had total control of it.

Albin, who was no fool, saw how stupid it was to try and horn

in on such a tighdy knit association; and, with all his usual cun-

ning and daring, took a risk on finding his own dumping ground,

contacting an unsavoury individual who ran a carnival stall in

Milan and who was, so rumour had it, a small fish in that big

Mafia pond, and proposing his opium to him at a discount.

Six months passing in this fashion, and his traffic growing

almost daily, Albin thought it important to appoint in Durazzo

an assistant to run transportation liaison, with opium arriving

from Fillbag Fjord by car, moving to Chiogga on a dinghy and

Milan on a Po canal boat.

1 6 1

So, in Tirana, Albin got to know a man of whom much was

said (notwithstanding that his total rascality was a byword among

Albania's criminal class) of his unfailing loyalty, tact, intuition,

imagination and lightning-quick wits. This man was (and if you

holding this book in your hands don't know by now, all I can

say is you ought to), this man was, I say, our old chum Othon

Lippmann!

Augustus got it all instandy: that Olga's papa - Olga, whom

his son Haig was hoping and actually planning to marry - was

a crony of his own old antagonist, a crony who, in addition, had

an animosity, a rancorous loathing, towards anything British!

"But if so," Anton Vowl had to know, "who was Olga's

mama?"

1 6 2

15

Which will furnish a probationary boost to a not always

almighty dollar ($)

Ah (said Augustus, continuing his narration), it took fully 12

months for us to find that out.

It would so turn out that, whilst amassing a tidy sum from a

traffic in opium that was now running without any major hic-

coughs, and whilst living it up in his fjord as sumptuously as

d'Annunzio in his palazzo, information was brought him that a

famous Hollywood star, Anastasia, was shooting a film in his

vicinity. Albin, thus, who was still looking for an opportunity of

attacking his British rival, and who had an almost irrational loath-

ing of all Anglo-Saxons, including Yanks, laid plans for a punitory

raid on a barbican in which Paramount, Anastasia's studio, had

thought to pitch its main camp.

In a blind fury Albin took a shotgun, a bazooka, napalm,

TNT and as many rounds of ammunition as it was practical

to carry; and with a salivating bulldog as his own guard, and

six of his companions in tow, of a sort that you'd want with

you in a tight spot, grimly struck out to satisfy his thirst for

Anglo-Saxon blood.

On his arrival night was falling, a blazing spring night, with a

hot day slowly fading into dusk.

What Albin saw first was that Paramount had built a trio of

small studios, facing north, on a mountain (in fact, on its foot-

hills), that its production staff was bivouacking not far from a

local tarn and that its cast was living in six gigantic caravans -

four to a caravan, saving Anastasia, who wasn't sharing with any

1 6 3

supporting actor. Noticing a flurry of activity in a studio - with

nobody too minor to muck in, from a stuntman to a storyboard

artist, from a continuity girl to a grip, all proposing fanciful

solutions to a tricky shot that just wouldn't work, consisting as

it did of a group of four walk-on actors who, for want of room,

had to stand so far back that only two at most would stay continu-

ally in focus - Albin told his gang to put a torch to it, to ravish

and kill anybody found in it, man, woman and child, and to bring

it all crashing down, whilst, on his own, approaching a caravan,

a particularly luxurious caravan with a star on its door, obviously

that in which Anastasia was dozing.

Slinking into a snug and inviting boudoir, with a romantic

aura about it making it a fitting spot for an amorous tryst, Albin

saw, in profusion and confusion, low divans, soft, furry rugs and

mirrors all of a dull opacity, as a sign not of sanctimony but of

sophistication. Its air was rich with a lascivious aroma and a lamp

was giving off a faint, soporific glow.

Albin took a turn around this intoxicating room, and, noticing

a thick canopy of rich, grainy damask, hid within it. An instant

was to pass, with Albin imbibing, and almost swooning from, a

fragrant odour that was wafting all about him.

And at last - Anastasia. What an apparition! Slipping off a

kimono of whitish organdy with black polka dots, slowly, tanta-

lisingly, unfurling, from waist to foot, a pair of clinging, cavity-

hugging black tarlatan tights, Hollywood's First Lady, now with

nothing on at all but a chunky gold ring with a ruby stud, lan-

guidly slunk down across an ottoman (a sofa, not a Turk), giving

out, whilst doing so, a profound sigh of physical satisfaction -

not so much a sigh, in fact, as a purr.

For a long instant Albin stood stock still, this ravishing panor-

ama totally transfixing him, its sinuous undulation inspiring part

of his own torso, at first against his will, to start curving outward

and upward.

As for Anastasia's drowsy body, now clad only in its birthday

suit, with skin of a milky purity, glossy and glowing, it was all

1 6 4

unwittingly displaying its charms to him, a chiaroscuro tattooing

its voluptuous forms with a shadowy striation.

Almost foaming at his mouth, his body brimming with lust,

Albin burst forth from out of hiding, crying, "Oh, Anastasia, I

am but a pincushion for Cupid's arrows!"

Instandy, in a flash of inspiration, adapting Solomon's Song

of Songs, Albin thought up an impromptu hymn to glorify

Anastasia's luminous and numinous physical form:

Thy body is a glorious yacht aboard which I will sail to distant

lands, a sloop, a brig rolling and pitching, tossing as I do

turn upon it,

Thy brow is a fort against which I will launch an attack,

a bastion, a rampart which my amorous transports, unruly

as a north wind, will bring tumbling down, a triumphal

arch through which it is I who will march in triumph,

Thy soft auditory conch, a spiral, a convolvulus, a morning

glory abounding in twists and turns about which I so look

forward to losing my way,

Thy lash, a vibration of a wink and twinkling of a

blink,

Thy mouth, an atoll of crimson coral into which, willingly

risking, all but asking for, suffocation, I will swim down,

down, down,

Thy throat, a pallid prison, a paragon of a caparison, a

tight collar for my strangulation,

Thy arm, a guard, a hoist, a staff of passion, a loop of a

lasso with which to corral my carnality,

Thy hand, an animal with four digits and a thumb, a

sampan and a skiff, a dory and a catamaran, floating, tack-

ing, drifting at random on my languorous body and on thy

own,

Thy back, a coast, an alluvial plain, a salt marsh, a smooth

165

couch, a rolling vista, an arc curving with bliss's sting and

spur,

Thy skin, O thy skin, a chamois sofi as swan's-down without

which I cannot go on living, a downy buff upon which I will

go to my tomb writing that holy word "Anastasia",

Thy flank, a rippling rill, an inconstant link in thy carnal

chain, a bodily boundary which I will accost first of all, a

primary port of call for that cockboat sailing forth from its

harbour in my lap,

Thy tummy-button, a kaolin always out-of-joint, a tiny

jug which I will fill up with my loving libations,

Thy loins, a coat-of-arms of an unknown armorial, a dark,

humid umbilicus, a door which I will unlock with my tumid

rod,

Thy buttocks, two round and rosy apricots, a plump pod, a

fruit containing a pip worth shaking out,

Thy bush, thy Burning Bush which I must know how to

confront, as did Christ, with valour and without timidity,

thy bush, holy pubis, tufts of passion, soft pinions, soft piping,

soft quills, soft fair hairs, as of a stork or a flamingo, Shangri-

la of physical and spiritual ardour,

Thy furrow, thy lotus furrow, furrow of oblivion, along

which all but my passion will vanish, which will swallow up

all but my lust, thy furrow of Nirvana, thy moist furrow in

which I will pass along, pass out and pass away, into which

I will go, born, ailing, dying, again and again, of a human,

all too human, bliss,

Thy bud, in which all will pass away, thy bud, that final

bastion in which I will confront my own total absorption, my

own abolition, my own annihilation, in that passion that will

last for always, in that last spasm that you and I will know

all too soon, our souls singing in total unison, in bliss or

oblivion, in that night that is a void, that instant of infinity

in which you and I will turn into an animal with two backs!

1 6 6

Thus sang Albin who, now baring his own body, hastily casting

off all his clothing, sprang, gluttonously, as if starving, as if dying

of thirst, on top of Anastasia.

"What!" said an indignant Anton Vowl. "It was against Anas-

tasia's will!" (But, you know, Vowl was still a callow youth, in

his first flush of manhood, who, in addition, had grown up in a

puritanical Catholic family, had had his first communion and his

confirmation and had, on occasion, thought of joining a

Franciscan community.)

"Oh no," said Augustus, smiling, "hardly that."

For, in fact, Anastasia, looking up at him, instandy took a fancy

to this charming rascal, willingly giving in to him and, whilst Albin

was slowly broaching ad limina apostolorum, murmuring:

"Ohhh -1 long had an itch for a brigand, a bandit, an outlaw!"

Was Albin still in hiding from his country's cops?

"You can say that again," said Albin.

"A substantial sum, I fancy, for bringing you into custody?"

"And how!" said Albin.

"How much?"

"A million hrivnas."

"How much is that in dollars?"

As a dollar was worth about thirty-two hrivnas, Albin briskly

ran up a rough calculation, taking inflation into account, and

said, just a bit boastfully, "Thirty-six thousand."

"That is a lot," said an admiring Anastasia, who, succumbing

to his approach, winking at him flirtatiously if not actually sal-

aciously, was to add, murmuring as if in a swoon: "Now go to

it, my Don Juan, my Casanova, my Valmont, my Lothario!"

It was as if Virginia Mayo was succumbing to Richard

Widmark, Rita Hayworth to Frank Sinatra, Joan Crawford to

Cary Grant, Kim Novak to Kirk Douglas, Gina Lollobrigida to

Randolph Scott, Anna Magnani to Marlon Brando, Liz Taylor

to Richard Burton, or Ingrid Thulin to Omar Sharif.

Was Anastasia, though, truthful to Albin or simply trotting

out an old Hollywood film script, word for word?

1 6 7

Why ask? With such wanton tickling, cuddling, fondling, lick-

ing and kissing going on, it was hard to think of as lubricious a

mating, as jjalant a coupling, as libidinal a mutual loving.

But whilst a goatishly rutting Albin was ravishing Anastasia just

as (if you know your classical mythology) Apollo had had his

way with Iris, Adonis with Calypso, and Antinous with Aurora,

his gang, complying with his wish, was attacking that studio

adjoining Anastasia's caravan, blowing it sky-high with a ton of

TNT, illuminating a pitch-dark night with its conflagration and

making an almighty Doomsday din. It was a sort of Walpurgis-

nacht. Its poor occupants, working hard at adjusting a shot or

simply hanging about, as you do in film studios, ran this way

and that, shouting and howling in panic. Most got it instantly,

struck by a burning plank, by a scorching whirlwind, by a boiling

rock torn out of its soil, by a spray of stinging-hot, skin-riddling

coals, or by a smoking brand whooshing up as if from out of a

volcano.

Notwithstanding all that was going on about him, notwith-

standing his gang's act of criminal arson and its nightmarishly

grisly impact on a group of Hollywood artists on location, noth-

ing could distract Albin from a form of amatory arson that was

just as hot if, naturally, not as homicidal.

So it was that, whilst his troop of oudaws, faithfully carrying

out his instructions, was riding back to its fiord, with an inward

glow of satisfaction at a job brought off without a hitch, Albin

was still billing and cooing, still spooning and smooching, in

pursuit of his passion.

It would last four days, all in all. At which point, it would

abruptly occur to Anastasia, shying back from Albin's lips and

warding off his warm, clinging arms, that, to fulfil a contract

drawn up by Paramount (which was paying its most popular star

a cool fifty thousand dollars) and William Morris (which would

naturally want its customary 10%), it was vital to finish shooting

its forthcoming film.

168

Alas, it was all an illusion! Not a survivor, in production or

cast! As for Paramount's filmic apparatus - totally kaput! Not a

Nagra, not a truck! A Paillard? Fit only for a junkyard! A pair

of sound booms? Nothing but a stack of scrap iron, twisting

innards, burnt-out casings, piping hot piping! A Dolly? It was

now, in its way, a work of art, a work of art by an avant-gardist

sculptor, a David Smith, say, drawing his inspiration from Naum

Gabo or Baldaccini!

Anastasia was thus out of a job, and was so distraught that

Albin, who was not a confrontational sort of chap and didn't

know how to go about consoling anybody in such a situation,

simply took off, abandoning, you might almost say marooning,

his inamorata, first saying, though, with an intimidating frown:

"God willing, it may not occur, but if a baby is born to us, a

fruit of our loins, a product of our passion, you must call it

Albin," adding, "for, if not, I, Albin Mavrokhordatos, last of my

clan, will pass away  and my Damnation will pass away too!"

1 6 9

15

In which you will know what Vladimir Ilich

thought of Hollywood

So Albin took off, and would find out, from a postcard arriving

at his fjord, that Anastasia had got as far as Cattaro in Italy,

instandy making contact with an ambassador from Washington.

But, having caught 'flu during what was by all accounts a long and

arduous trip, our star's right lung was now ailing from catarrhal

inflammation.

On studying a thick batch of X-rays, a local consultant finally

said that Anastasia would pull through only by giving up film-

making for good and all. In truth, notwithstanding "Actors

Studio" histrionics and faindy Stanislavskian tics, it was now

common gossip in Hollywood that Anastasia probably hadn't

much affinity with sound-film acting. (All of this was occurring

round about 1928 and it took a solitary film, an "all talking, all

singing, all dancing" musical with A1 Jolson, for Fox, MGM,

Columbia and Anastasia's own studio, Paramount, instantly to

opt for this most radical transformation in film history.)

Thus Anastasia, a vamp who had got Farouk to slim down

and Baudouin to plump up, a vamp who had had Taft sighing,

Wilson crying and Ramsay MacDonald lying, a vamp for

whom Winston Churchill had bought a gigantic box of Havana

cigars and of whom, in a radio broadcast from Moscow, Vladimir

Ilich Ulianov had said no opium was as fatally noxious, brought

to its abrupt conclusion a filmography so uniformly brilliant, so

fantastically lustrous, it was absurd that it should finish in this

way. Six Oscars! Four Lions d'or\ Ah, sic transit Gloria Mundil

1 7 0

It was a traumatic shock for thousands of film buffs. A fan

club in Iron Mountain, in Wisconsin, not far from Michigan,

took poison to a man, a young Kabuki actor in Tokyo would

commit ritual hara-kiri in Anastasia's honour and a Jamaican

sailor took it into his mind to jump off Radio City Music Hall,

in midtown Manhattan.

Anastasia was to languish for six months in a sanatorium in

Davos. Rumour has it that Thomas Mann, catching sight of this

still ravishing wraith of a woman strolling about its grounds,

said, "If only I'd known Anastasia whilst writing my Magic Moun-

tain . . . What a companion for Hans Castorp! How pallid Claw-

dia Chauchat is by comparison!"

Finally Anastasia would go into labour but, by now fatally ill

with TB, would pass away in childbirth, saying, in a last painful

gasp, "You must call my baby Olga . . . Olga Mavrokhordatos

. . . To Olga I assign a substantial patrimony . . . all of what I

own, but for a donation of fifty thousand dollars to this

sanatorium and its administration . . . And you, for your part,

must contract to bring up my only child until . . . until its

majority . . ."

Thus Olga would grow up in Davos, knowing nothing of

Albin, in a chic sanatorium with only counts and viscounts, maha-

rajahs and maharanis, lordships and ladyships, for company . . .

Anton Vowl cut in. "But what about Albin?"

"It was in 1931 that Albin found out that Olga was living at

Davos; and, avid to contact this unknown offspring of his, took

off in a flash, forcing Othon Lippmann, who was now his right-

hand man, to follow him. Though it had to zigzag through lots

of mountainous twists and turns, Albin had his Bugatti bowling

along flat out, full blast. . . but actually didn't turn up at Davos."

"Why not?" said a dumbstruck Anton.

"I was told by Othon that, at about two-thirds of his way to

Davos, not far from Innsbruck, Albin, virtually abandoning him,

told him to stay put in his Bugatti, informing him of his own

obligation to call on a man in that vicinity. Spying on Albin,

171

watching him go into a vacant-looking hangar, Othon hung

about all day and, that night, paid a visit to it in his turn . . .

and found nobody in it but Albin, who was lying, all but bathing,

in his own blood, now fit only as food for worms."

"Ho hum," said Anton with a sardonic grin. "A bit of a tall

story, if you want my opinion."

"That's just what I said. In fact, I'd put my bottom dollar on

it that it was Othon who'd slain him for his loot."

"But did Othon go on to Davos to join up with Olga?"

"Natch. And no doubt with a kidnapping job bubbling in his

mind. A kidnapping from a sanatorium  that was typical of such

a villain! Othon did in fact talk to its administration, but had no

luck with Olga. In fact, a strong hint was thrown out that his

'rights' in this affair had no basis in Swiss law and that any

insisting or importuning on his part would land him in jail -

without passing Go, as Monopoly would put it."

"And so," said Vowl, summing up, "Olga still didn't know

what this 'Mavrokhordatos affair' was all about?"

A sigh from Augustus.

"That's right. What's important to grasp, though, is that

nobody at all was conscious that a form of Damnation was cling-

ing to that family and always would do. Olga was to grow up

without having an inkling of what an infamous and horrifying

jinx it was."

On Othon finally giving up his own malignant ghost (and natur-

ally told by him of this ghastly Law that clung to our family and

sworn at by him for unwittingly allowing my Zahir to vanish),

I would go to Davos in my turn, on four occasions, hoping to

do away with Olga by my own hand, as an act of human charity.

But, by now, Olga was too old to go on living in a sanatorium.

An informant told of a woman conforming to Olga's physiog-

nomy living in Locarno. I took a train to Locarno. A phony

alarm! I was told, again, that Olga had flown off to London to

buy a flat in Mayfair. So I instantly got going, my train arriving

172

at Victoria Station just as Olga's was pulling out, bound for

Frankfurt. I rang up a diplomat in Frankfurt to whom I was

known, asking him to shadow Olga until my arrival. But, ironic-

ally, my diplomat pal, an idiot whom I had thrown out of his

job as quickly as you could say 'Jack Robinson', saw fit to stamp

Olga's passport with a visa for Stockholm, in which city, worn

out, I simply quit looking.

"And that," said Augustus in conclusion, "is why I said Haig

hadn't got it. My poor son thought, with all his oaths and insults,

to damn his papa. But, in wishing to marry Olga, it's actually

Haig who's going towards that Damnation, not I, it's Haig who's

sinking fast into that machination that is afoot all around us!

Now, his first night is on . . . ?"

"Monday," said Anton Vowl, consulting an almanac.

"Four days . . ." said Augustus doubtfully. "Still, I think my

Hispano-Suiza is up to it. But only by starting now, this instant.

To Urbino! You and I must draw my son back from that void

that's yawning insidiously on his horizon! So hurry up! Put a

sock in it! Chop chop! AndiamoV

1 7 3

15

For which many will no doubt claim that it adds much

that is crucial to our story

"All right, all right," said Anton with conviction. "You and I will

go to Urbino, driving all day and all night, you driving whilst I

catch forty winks, and so on. But I think it important to put our

trip off for a day or so, till tomorrow morning, say, for our first

priority is to find out what Douglas was clumsily trying to say

by 'a blank inscription on a billiard board'."

"But why, for crying out loud? What has my billiard board

got to do with all of this?" said Augustus, who was itching to

start off.

"It was, was it not, in your billiard room that that Damnation

now stalking your son was born. And a crucial point subsists in

this affair, a point on which, to this day, nobody has any infor-

mation. You know that Douglas took your Zahir, right?"

"Right."

"What you don't know is what Douglas did with it!"

"But you . . . that inscription .. ." said Augustus, blanching.

"You may think I'm crazy, but that inscription will finally

inform us - such, I should add, is my wish, not a fact - why

such a Damnation clings to your Zahir."

"But who's going to work it all out?"

"I am!" said Vowl triumphantly. "Long ago I got Douglas to

draw a rough diagram and I'd study it for hours and hours at a

sitting, only stopping to consult with a famous cryptologist in

Paris. Today, if I can hardly claim to know what it's all about,

I'm willing to say that I harbour a suspicion or two that ought

1 7 4

to furnish us with a solution, total or partial - or, at worst, iron

out most of its complications.''

"Okay, you win."

So, grudgingly going along with him, Augustus took Vowl

into his billiard room.

Approaching Augustus's billiard board, running his hand along

its inscription and applying a magnifying glass to it, Vowl took

stock of its rash of curious whitish dots.

"Aha," said Vowl at last in a murmur, "I was right. It's a

Katoun."

"A Katoun?"

"Katoun, or Katun - a noun indicating a scrap of graffiti

common to various Mayan civilisations, principally that in Yuca-

tan. It's a fairly basic modus significandi, particularly practical in

transcribing sayings, myths, almanacs, liturgical writings and

inscriptions found on tombs or on triumphal archways.

"It consists mostly of odd bits of information (invariably

spanning a rigorous chronology of thirty springs), information

about months, lunar months, canicular days, royal birthdays,

migrations, cardinal points and so on. On occasion, though,

you'll find, not a book, but, say, a tiny chunk of narration surpass-

ing its strict transitivity and actually aspiring to what you and I

might think of as an artistic quality . . ."

"So, knowing that it's a Katoun, you can automatically work

out its signification?" said Augustus, who was dying to find a

solution.

"Good Lord, no," said Vowl, smiling, "our work is cut out for

us - till tomorrow morning, anyhow." (It was now approaching

midnight.) "Its signification will only show up - if it shows up at

all - as soon as I can fathom by what path of action, by what

cryptological algorithm, I can transform it from a subscript

(which is to say, this inscription as it now stands) via a transcript

into a final translation.

"But what I must first try to grasp is what kind of axiomatis-

ation such a transcription is bound up in. For, you know," said

175

Vowl, smoothly going on, "most of its complications will spring

from this plain fact: that you and I cannot, obligatorily, work it

all out. Today, at most, I can grasp, oh, about a fifth of it - and,

by dawn tomorrow, you'll know, giving or taking a word, only

as much as a third."

"All right, but do you think, notwithstanding so major an

unknown factor, that you can unlock what signal it holds for

us?"

"Why not? Cryptology is not a myth. It's not a form of witch-

craft. Think of Champollion or of Laranda, Arago, Alcala, Riga,

Riccoboni, von Schonthan and Wright. In truth, a signification

will show up, but, I must say to you, distandy, in a slighdy cloudy

futurity, in a slightly vacillating cloud. I'll grasp it by association.

"Actually, I would count on a trio of distinct strata of clarifi-

cations:

"First, you and I look at it casually and think of it as just

confusing poppycock, foolish mumbo jumbo - noticing, though,

that, as a signal, it's obviously not random or chaotic, that it's

an affirmation of sorts, a product of a codifying authority, submit-

ting to a public that's willing to admit it. It's a social tool assuring

communication, promulgating it without any violation, accord-

ing it its canon, its law, its rights.

"Who knows what it is? A bylaw? A Koran? A court summons?

A bailiffs logbook? A contract for purchasing land? An invitation

to a birthday party? A poll tax form? A work of fiction? A crucial

fact is that, my work advancing, what I'll find rising in priority

isn't its initial point of application but its ongoing articulation

for, if you think of it, communication (I might almost say 'com-

munion') is ubiquitous, a signal coursing from this individual to

that, from so-and-so to such-and-such, a two-way traffic in an

idiom of transitivity or narrativity, fiction or imagination, affabul-

ation or approbation, saga or song.

"Thus, first of all, is Logos and its primacy, that talking 'it' of

our inscription: putting it baldly, you and I know that it's talking

to us but still don't know what it's saying. Now, assuming that

1 7 6

it's a fictional work, or part of a fictional work, what I must look

for is a group of banal, common, familiar signs surrounding it,

by which I can start assuming, unambiguously, that a work of

fiction is in fact what it is: a handful of individuals in conflict, in

confrontation with a curious sort of fatality, imagining, right up

to its last paragraph, that this fatality is actually a fortuity, a

product of nothing but downright bad luck. An individual is

slain, now two, now four, and now all six, with a haunting strand

of plot working its way through a mosaic of motifs so confusing

that you and I can't possibly summon up a vision of its totality

from A to Z, its organic unity, so confusing that our wish to

find a significant sign in it is simply an illusion.

"But, gradually, with our starting to grasp that a law is structur-

ing its composition, this initial confusion of ours will turn to

admiration - admiration at how, with such a niggardly grammati-

cal, syntactical and punctuational construction, with a vocabulary

cut down to a minimum by so many constraints of scission,

omission and approximation, such an inscription can still contain

so much information.

"Dumbstruck by this amazing capacity that it has - whilst

outwardly avoiding a signification which it knows is taboo  to

affirm it anyway, articulating it by a cunning bias, shouting it out

as if from a rooftop, formulating it by association, by allusion, by

saturation - dumbstruck, as I say, you and I, although still not

totally grasping at this point what it's saying to us, can at last

boast of proving its validity as a signal, as a communication.

"From which point it's but a hop, skip and a jump to grasping

why so much was built on so rigorous a constraint, so tyrannical

a curb. It was born out of a mad and morbid whim: that of

wholly satisfying a fascination with linguistic gratuity, with pro-

scription and subtraction, that of avoiding any word striking its

author as too obvious, too arrogant or too common, of according

its sijjnifiant just a gap, a slit, a loop, so narrow, so slim and so

sharp, that you instantly grasp its justification.

"Thus, as though by transmuting a quality into its contrary,

1 7 7

from omission is born affirmation, from constraint is born auton-

omy, from obscurity is born light!"

"I would applaud your diagnosis," said Augustus, "if I had any

faith in its conclusion. But now you must hurry. My watch is

ticking away, night is falling fast, and from Azincourt to Urbino

it's about 28 Indian kadams, which is to say, 8 nagis or 18

kuppodutur ams!"

"I know," Vowl said simply. "Don't worry, I'll go to it, plung-

ing up to my waist into all this murky arcana."

At first, though, Vowl said to yours truly, "Squaw, go into

Augustus's atrium. In my bag you'll find a stack of six books.

Bring it to us, will you, it's vital for our work."

So I did as I was told and brought Vowl back his stack of

books. It was an amazing anthology of all things Mayan: a

translation of Popol-Vuh by Villacorta-Rodas, R. P. Sahagun's

transcription, in its totality, of Machu-Pichu and, most particu-

larly, a trio of Chilam-Balam - Ixil, Oaxaca and Uaxactun.

Transcribing it took right until dawn. His armpits growing

moist and malodorous, Vowl soon had his cardigan off and was

busy working in his shirt, whilst, to cool him down, I'd bring

him, variously, a glass of Chardonnay, a tomato sandwich, a

cappuccino and a whisky-and-soda. I would pick my way through

a mass of rough drafts and scorings-out, which Vowl, chain-

smoking, sucking cigar upon cigar, coughing fit to bust his guts,

spitting up saliva and pulling his hair out, had thrown away in

dissatisfaction.

It was painfully slow going. Vowl would blow his top, coming

out with disgusting cuss-words, boiling, almost frothing, with

irritation at his own stupidity, gnashing his fangs in fury, turning

a bright crimson colour and on occasion murmuring a word so

inaudibly I just couldn't catch what it was, an odd sort of mantra

that was said again and again, monotonously. It was all a bit

alarming - and a load of codswallop, in my opinion.

But, finally, at cockcrow:

178

"Ouf!" said a hot and sticky Vowl, obviously worn out but

glowing with satisfaction and giving Augustus (who had to put

on a lorgnon to study it) a scrap of cardboard with 25 curious

graffiti on it, adding, "I thought for an instant I wasn't going to

crack it."

"What do you know," said Augustus cursorily glancing at it,

"it's just as baffling as it was to start with!"

"Oh, do calm down, will you," said Vowl. "You'll grasp it in

just an instant. Look, Katouns usually draw from a pool of six

local patois. In this particular inscription it's a Chiapas patois,

known as 'Lacandon', which, so tradition has it, was brought

into play mosdy in soothsaying Katouns. Its transcription is

known, but not its pronunciation, for, as a morphology fit only

for anticipation, divulgation or vaticination, it's invariably full of

ambiguous locutions and syntactical shortcuts of a kind that only

clairvoyants or shamans can unlock . . ."

Augustus anxiously cut in.

"But if that's . . . What will you . . . ?"

"I'm coming to that, Augustus, so just shut up, will you. I

know of a handful of ad hoc solutions that will assist us:

"Its complication arising principally from its 'a-vocal' quality

as a jargon (that's to say, it's a jargon with no history of vocalisa-

tion), and thus from an implicit contradiction with any notion

of pronunciation, by choosing, in imitation of that which I do

know:

Ba va sa ka ma sar pa ta par da

Bi vi si ki mi sir pi ti pir di

Bo vo so ko mo sor po to por do. . .

a matrix simulating transcription, I think that I can, by logic,

intuition or imagination, polish up my original rough

draft."

Vowl instandy got busy, chalking up his 25 signs on a black-

board and coming up with this:

1 7 9

Ja Gra Va Sa La Da La Ma Tan

A Ma Va Jas 'A Ta Krat' Da

La Pa Sa Ya Ra Da Ra Cha

This didn't calm Augustus, who couldn't fathom a word of it

and who said in a fury, "For all I know, it's in Afrikaans or

Sanskrit. What I do know, though, is that it isn't in any way

stimulating my imagination!"

But, trying to mollify him, Vowl told him that his goal was

at last in sight and that by noon Augustus could count on having

a translation of his Katoun.

Chasing us both out of our own billiard room, Vowl also said

that nobody should disturb him now, at any cost, for four hours

or so. So, whilst Augustus got busy polishing his Hispano-Suiza,

oiling it, filling it up with gas, fixing it up for its forthcoming

dash down to Urbino, I was hard at work rusding up a filling

lunch for all of us.

And Anton Vowl was as good as his word, surfacing punctually

at midday and approaching Augustus with a scrap of cardboard

in his hand.

"You want to know what that blank signal on a billiard board

is all about? Voila."

"Oh, you talk us through it," said Augustus, subsiding into a

sort of ghastly languor. "I'm in a total funk about it all."

Thinking of that instant now, I call to mind a sky that was

luridly clouding up, a horizon that was almost totally in shadow,

a build-up of alarming nimbostratus, as if a storm was about to

burst, and a gust of wind abruptly rising, smashing a fanlight

window and causing us all to jump.

I think I said, if inaudibly, "Oh, God, I'm so afraid," and I

saw that Augustus was mumbling, stumbling, possibly praying.

At which point Augustus and I finally, and in toto, got to know

that inscription that was so damning to us. Vowl's articulation

was horribly icy and cutting, chopping up what was said into

1 8 0

small hard chunks of information and talking so distinctly I

almost thought Vowl wasn't talking at all but spitting a host of

razor-sharp darts at poor Augustus - darts that would sting him

and prick him, drill him and nail him down, that, in short, would

crucify him.

It was all long, long ago, my hair is now gray and straggly,

but his words still haunt my soul:

I POLISH MY LAW ON A CLIFF,

IMPRINTING "AN I FOR AN I"

IN A ROCK'S TRITURATION

An instant - an instant as long as an infinity - was to pass.

Nobody said anything. A gigantic wasp was buzzing around that

scrap of cardboard that Vowl was brandishing.

"Now do you know what it's all about?" said Vowl softly.

"Actually," said Augustus just as softly, "what it calls to mind

is Arthur Gordon Pym. In particular, its closing paragraph."

"I must say I hadn't thought of it," said Vowl, "but I'd go

along with that."

"And my principal misgiving in this affair," Augustus would

go on, "is that this inscription, too, is bristling with bad luck."

"But can any of us do anything about it?"

"That's what I found so alarming. What I saw in this 'rock's

trituration' was a mould of stucco which, on Monday, my poor

son will wrap about his body. Thus will this Law of 'an I for an

I' kill him! Can't you grasp it - Haig is lost as soon as Karl Bohm,

his conductor, pours him into that monstrous dicky. That's why

you and I must fly to Urbino, arriving at its palazzo by Monday

night!"

So, with Vowl in tow, Augustus quickly got into his Hispano-

Suiza and took off in a flash.

Alas, as you know, notwithstanding Augustus's driving night and

day, without pausing for a snack, or a drink, or forty winks, his

throbbing brow practically stuck to his car's front window, such

1 8 1

was his fixation on arriving in Urbino by dusk, it was all in

vain. Bad luck was to dog his path in a trio of small towns. At

Aillant-sur-Thonon six cogs would jam, blocking up a joint; at

Isonzo his dynamo would burn out, ruining an accumulation

circuit; and, to cap it all, at San Laranda, his ignition was to

grow so hot it would actually fall apart in his hands!

Arriving at Urbino's ducal palazzo, and told that Haig had put

on what you might call his iron, or stucco, lung, Augustus's plan

was to go to his son's changing room and instandy cut him out

of it; but a doorman wouldn't allow him in and sat him down

on a foldaway chair in a back row upstairs. (It was standing room

only.) Augustus had to stay put on that chair throughout Don

Giovanni, downcast, sobbing, oblivious of Mozart's ravishing

music.

Finally, a spotlight would focus on Haig, transforming him

into a pallid, marmorial monolith of light. Ah! but you all know

what was to occur at that fatal instant: Augustus's son would

stub his foot, trip up and fall. . . and his mould would split from

top to bottom . . .

"No!" Olga has coldly cut in. "A fact is missing from your

account, an important, a vital fact. You told us of Douglas's doom

just as Augustus told us of it on his arrival at Azincourt, whilst

transporting his son in a shroud.

"But, in informing you, Augustus was to omit a crucial point.

Was it from a lack of information? Or a psychological blackout?

Or did Augustus act unwittingly, assuming such a load of guilt

for his conduct as to wish to block it at all costs from his conscious

mind? I couldn't say. But Anton Vowl also saw Douglas's appar-

ition, Vowl saw it all and got it all!"

"But saw what. . . ? got what. . . ? if not that Haig lost his

footing, falling down as hard as a baobab cut in half?" asks

Squaw, who may truly want to know or is simply trying to show

Olga up.

Olga laughs harshly, unsmilingly. "Saw that Augustus, worn

1 8 2

out by his long trip down through Italy, full of misgivings and

hardly in command of his own actions - Augustus, as I say,

watching Douglas, abruptly stood up, giving out such a loud,

fortissimo cry that it brought about his son's collision with a

column and his final fatal fall!"

1 8 3

15

On running a risk by asking for a fish farci

"My God!" Squaw shouts out, visibly aghast at such an accusation

and instandy going into attack against Olga.

"Who told you such a foul bit of dirt? It was a mishap, I know

it. Blood will out! It's natural that you, a Mavrokhordatos, should

spout such filth! Why, it was your papa who put a jinx on us all!

All of us, facing damnation from your family!"

"Oh, do stop your squawking, Squaw!" says Olga. "It's just

shock that's making you blurt out such stupid things."

But, stubbornly continuing, Squaw adds with a sly, shifty grin,

"So why was it Augustus who had to cry out? Who knows if

it wasn't you? That's right, how do I know - how do any

of us know - it wasn't your cry that was so loud and sharp

as to kill poor Haig? Couldn't you too claim a similarity with a

protagonist in Don Giovanni? And didn't you too go to Urbino

to watch it?"

"You know, Squaw has a point," sighs Savorgnan. "Anybody

at all, Augustus as much as Olga, Anton Vowl as much as a

woman, say, sitting in front of him, had an opportunity of throw-

ing Douglas off his guard with an untoward cry, thus provoking

that tragic fall of his. So how do you know, Olga, that it was in

fact Augustus who did it?"

"I was told all about it by Anton Vowl," says Olga calmly.

"Vowl saw it occur. And, talking about it, Vowl would actually

claim to know by intuition that, in that stucco mantrap of his,

Douglas was such a startling, such a disturbing, apparition that,

1 8 4

r

as though in imitation of a dying lion or an albatross brought

down and slain by a drunk sailor, Augustus was bound to cry

out. As soon as Douglas was spodit, Vowl saw Augustus turn

livid, his lips shaking; actually saw a roar forming in his throat.

Vowl's plan was to jump up and try to stop him from airing it,

but Augustus's cry would halt him in his tracks, for it was a truly

inhuman cry, a cry of Astaroth, of a Sphinx flapping its wings

on a clifltop, a jjrtdo indiavolato roaring up from his lungs. Doug-

las lost his footing, collapsing as though struck down by a

tumultuous gust of wind. And all that confusion and commotion

that was naturally to follow, all that hubbub and din, would

drown out Augustus's initial cry."

I, too, said Olga (continuing this dramatic account) would almost

pass away as Douglas did. I was watching it a l l . . . As I saw him

fall, a long furrow zigzagging across his mould, I sank swooning

into a profound coma. I was put on a couch, on which I lay,

practically dying, for six days. At which point a doctor brought

to my nostrils a product with a strong odour of ammonia. Finally

coming to, I found Vowl sitting in my room, clasping my hand

in his. And it was by him that I was told, bit by bit, in dribs and

drabs, what was going on. Having snuck into a local hospital,

in which his son was laid out, Augustus took his body away

without obtaining any authority to do so. I just had to go to

Azincourt.

"No," I was told by Vowl, "you, too, can claim no authority

in this sordid affair. Augustus would kill you as quickly and as

unthinkingly as a wild animal, a jaguar, say - Augustus would

kill anybody of your family, for it is, in his opinion, a Mavrokhor-

datos who was his son's assassin!"

So I was told all about my family, all about that Damnation

with which its history is bound up. But, instandy contradicting

him, I said with a sob in my throat:

"It was Augustus who brought about his son's doom by giving

out such a horrifying cry. Thus will I now carry out that Dam-

185

nation that I carry within my soul, for it was that man's fault,

and only his fault, that I am now a widow!"

For six springs, Anton would constandy tag along, faithfully

following in my trail. I didn't ask him to. I didn't want him to.

What I did want, in fact, was to catch a train to Azincourt and

kill Augustus by my own hand. But I was starting to find that

Anton had a curious aura about him - a sort of charisma,

you might say. I found I simply couldn't do without his kindly

disposition and his unfailing affability. I was about to lay

down my arms, capitulating unambiguously to his natural gift

for consolation. I found him awfully amusing and found, too,

in his company, that I wasn't now thinking so much of

Douglas's charms or, I must admit, of his killing. If, as would

occasionally occur, I was in a sorrowful mood, Anton always had

a comforting word. And if I abrupdy had that old craving to do

away with Augustus, Anton would know just how to calm my

ardour.

I had quit my vocation for good: I wouldn't sing for anybody.

All that capital (substantial capital, too) that I'd got from Anastasia

had grown annually, by compound accumulation, into

a bank account that would allow as gracious and luxurious a

living as anybody could wish for. Nor was Anton in what you

might call financial straits: as with a Larbaud, or should I say a

Barnabooth, his capital was almost without limit, hinging as

it did, so rumour had it, on a mining supply that just wouldn't

dry up, so profound was it, containing zinc, strontium, platinum

and cobalt.

Anton and I took lots of trips. With him I was to know how

oddly wistful is cruising on a transadantic ship, how chillingly

cold it is to camp out at night, how fascinating to stand in front

of an unknown vista, how afflicting to cut short a visit that's only

just starting . . .

At long last, during a ball, and whilst I was indulging my

passion for mazurkas, Anton was to admit to a passion of his

186

own. I took him in my arms, giving way, informing him that I

too had a soft spot for him. I'd had a handful of ungainly suitors,

but Anton was a courtly kind of swain, gallant and good-looking,

making his play with charm and assiduity, buying diamonds for

my hand, diamonds for my wrist, a sparkling diamond collar for

my throat, all vying for my approval, and, at lunch, invariably

choosing such pricy tidbits as Scotch woodcock, ortolans farcis

and Iranian caviar . . .

"Was that black or gray caviar?" asks Amaury, with his almost

pathological fixation on food.

"Oh, can't you think about anything but your stomach, you

big fat glutton!" a furious Savorgnan shouts at him.

Olga, continuing, anxiously scrunching a hanky up in a ball,

looks about to burst into sobs.

"I had Anton's staff, a maid, a groom and so forth, at my

disposal. Mornings, in my boudoir, I'd find a mountain of mim-

osas or orchids which Anton would grow in tropical conditions

- this was in mid-March - and instandy forward to my Paris flat

by air."

As our liaison was growing strong, though, as Douglas was

gradually turning into a fond but fading ghost from my past, as,

far from him, far from Urbino, far from Azincourt and Augustus,

I was starting to blossom into an ordinary happy young woman,

as if, having known so much crying and sobbing, an Adantic of

sobbing, I was finally coming into port, into dry dock, Anton

was, by contrast, growing proportionally downcast. I had no

notion why this was so, but, day by day, I found his conduct

most alarming - his constant, nail-biting agitation, as if falling

victim to an unknown pain or malignancy, his constandy grim-

acing and also, curiously, his constandy touching with his hand

a talisman bound around his right foot by an invisibly slim gold

cord. Chancing to catch sight of it - it was an ugly thing, clumsy-

looking, inartistic, a bit puny, calling to mind nothing so much

as a scrap of typography, a shaving off a compositor's floor - I

1 8 7

was avid to know why Anton thought that such an unsighdy

brooch (if that's what in fact it was) might bring him luck. But

my darling abruptly lost his cool, boiling up with a fury that was

as stormy as it was without foundation, shouting foul, scathing

insults and unjust accusations and, as I thought, spoiling for a

fight. I ran away.

For four days I had no word from him - until, on a warm

autumn night, I was brought up short by a soft tapping at my

door and, in an instant, with nary a hint of an apology, I saw

him approaching and smiling but also saying things that I found

profoundly disturbing.

"It was just six autumns ago today," said Anton, "that you and

I took off on our world tour, roaming around this country and

that, visiting all sorts of famous landmarks, from St Paul's in

London to Agra's Taj Mahal. Now your mourning of Douglas

is past, it's had its day. You hardly think of your loathing for

Augustus. So what I say to you is that you must go to Azincourt

with a word of consolation for him. Having lost his son, allow

Augustus to gain an in-law!"

Controlling an instinct to cry, I said, "Augustus isn't important

 I totally wash my hands of him - but for you, Anton, my

passion grows daily. It's thanks to you, my darling, that I got

my sanity back. If you abandon your Olga now, I think I'll go

crazy again!"

"No," said Anton, coldly oblivious of my supplication. "It's

only at Azincourt that you can go on living calmly and happily,

in harmony with your soul. As for yours truly, I must go away,

far from this city and, in particular, far from you. For that Dam-

nation that struck Haig is now on my trail!"

"But why?"

"I'm just coming to that. Augustus was Haig's kin only by

adoption - on a tramp's instructions, a tramp known as Tryphiod-

orus. Douglas didn't know who his natural papa was; nor, in

fact, did Augustus. But I found out about six months ago, totally

haphazardly, that - wait for it! - it was actually Tryphiodorus!"

188

"But what's that got to do with you?" I said, dumbstruck.

"This! I also found out, within four days of that information,

by a card which a man, I don't know who, was to slip into my

tux whilst I was at a nightclub in Albi watching Lolita Van

Paraboom  you know, that star of Paul Raymond's shows in

Soho - I found out, I say, that just as dark a shadow was cast

on my own origins as on Haig's. I had always thought that I was

a son of an Irish tycoon, who, dying of a coronary on my fifth

birthday, had a tutor control my upbringing, a tutor who, a

bit of a Catholic bigot, thought nothing of simply packing his

ward off to a Franciscan school for his indoctrination. Not a

bit of it - my natural papa, I was told, was also known as

Tryphiodorus!"

"What!!!"

"That's what I said!"

"But . . . but if what you say is so . . . !!!"

"Uh huh. You got it. Douglas was my sibling!"

Half-choking, Amaury Conson can hardly say a word.

"What? Douglas was Anton's sibling? What do you know

about that! It's . . . it's a gag!"

"You don't think Anton was having you on?" Squaw asks.

But Savorgnan, showing no sign of this story surprising him,

says "Shhhh . . ." adding, "Shut up, all of you, and allow Olga

to finish. And if I don't look too aghast, it's simply that I'm

afraid, I'm much afraid, that, from now until nightfall, I'm going

to find out many things just as astonishing, many facts just as

confusing, and many plot points just as paradoxical."

So it all starts again, notwithstanding that Olga's public, as you

might call it, lying flat out on a sofa, or lolling back in an arm-

chair, would occasionally almost nod off, for this discussion,

which had got going that morning, was proving long and tiring.

In addition, it was hard to work out what its implication was,

though nobody had any doubt at all that, at worst, chock-full of

1 8 9

action, rising and falling, twisting and turning, it would follow

an old, old tradition, that of fiction not fact.

Now (says Olga), if this fact, that Anton was a sibling of

Douglas, was disturbing, if it was, to put it mildly, simply aston-

ishing, still, it didn't imply, ipso facto, that it was any kind of

nail in Anton's coffin. I had to ask what was prompting my

inamorato to abandon his Olga, and all Anton could talk about

was of living in constant panic of that Damnation that struck

down his sibling striking him down in his turn.

"Douglas was slain," was how Anton put it, "and now it's my

turn. If that law of 'an I for an I' that I found on Augustus's

billiard board at Azincourt contains any truth, if, similarly, I

should put any faith in your papa's abomination of us all - your

papa, Albin, a man with a gift not only for loathing humanity

but for acting on his misanthropy - if all of that is fact and not

fancy, my only option is to abandon you, to fly as far away from

you as I possibly can, splitting that chain of passion, that chain

of mutual fascination, uniting us."

"But, my darling, I didn't draw poor Douglas to his doom! It

was Augustus's cry, not my hand, that struck him down!"

"No!" said Anton. "As soon as Douglas got into that stucco

mould of his, his Damnation was all but automatic. You

can't say that any of us sought his doom. Douglas was simply

a victim of that law that's punishing us all. Augustus, though,

will guard you from harm; as for yours truly, an old hand

at this sort of conundrum, I plan to go just as far as I can,

to try and work out to my own satisfaction what's going on,

what's causing this shadowy malignancy to cling to our

family!"

So saying, softly kissing my hand, trying to calm a loud fit of

sobs that was shaking my bosom and again advising my instant

withdrawal to Azincourt, Anton took flight.

Anton would join a firm of solicitors in Aubusson, but nothing

was to run smoothly for him. I don't know why it was so, but I

190

found out that it took him just four months to pack it in and

start practising common law at Issoudin. So from Issoudin to

Ornans; luckily, I got to know a fact or two about his situation

in that town. Anton would scoot about in a BMW, with lots of

local girls swooning in admiration for him. In his bag was a thick

manuscript consisting, it was said, of an important monograph

on a tricky point of grammar, a monograph that Anton was

working on and was about to finish. Nobody found him anything

but gracious and civil, most particularly during a local symposium

on Lhomond in which Anton took a major part, giving a stimu-

lating talk on grammatical subjunctivity. But his, how shall I put

it, his romantic companion was a tart working in a shop that

sold various goods for sadomasochists; and, following criticism

at court for a confusing affidavit, Anton had to quit Ornans for

good.

I soon got a postcard saying that Anton was working at Ursins

and (from what I could work out) living in lodgings. I took

down an adas and saw that this Ursins was a small, charming

country town not too far from Oyonnax (Jura). Finally, I found

out that Anton was living at Yvazoulay, just a tiny dot on a map,

also not far from Ursins, and about which nothing was known.

That, alas, was all of 20 springs ago - 20 springs without knowing

in which town my darling was living, without knowing if Anton

was living at all or . . . or not. . .

"Voila," says Olga, summing up. "For my own part, bowing to

Anton's ultimatum, I caught a train for Azincourt. Augustus,

who was at first against unlocking his doors to a Mavrokhordatos,

was in fact adamant about it, did finally back down and admit

his son's consort.

"And so now you know my story, from start to

finish . . ."

"It's almost nightfall," says Squaw, sounding all in. "I'm thirsty

and I'm hungry - all of you, too, I don't doubt. And Jonah in

particular - poor Jonah hasn't had its rations now for four days.

191

If you don't want to kill it by starvation, you must nourish it

now - instandy."

"Squaw is right," says Olga. "Our first priority is food for

Jonah."

It's a mild, almost sultry night that's just about to fall. A

soft: wind blows, rocking a tall acacia and swaying its fronds.

Olga, Savorgnan, Squaw and Amaury all look down into

Jonah's pool, whisding a song, that song that usually had

Haig's carp swimming up in a flash, and crying out: "Jonah!

Jonah!"

No Jonah.

"Now that's what I call abnormal," Squaw murmurs anxiously,

"not to say a tiny bit alarming. Jonah's had 20 springs, as Olga

would say, to adapt to us, to distinguish our vocal chords and

to put its childhood companion  I'm alluding, naturally, to Haig

- out of its mind."

Soon a torchlit hunt is on for Jonah, probing its pool, dragging

it with toils and catching six goldfish, an anchovy, a turbot, a

tuna fish and about thirty minnows.

And at last Jonah turns up - or should I say, Jonah's carcass.

Poor Haig's baby carp had grown. It was about a yard long, if

not a full fathom, its whitish crop scintillating in a pallid halo of

torchlight.

Oh God, what a chilling sight! Oh what profound sorrow!

Olga knows, almost by instinct, that Albin's damnation is still

intact! What a black horizon looming up! Oh what a fatal sign!

What a malignant warning!

Wiping away a drop of salty liquid that is dripping from his

chin, Amaury talks wistfully of his liking for Jonah, that charm-

ing, cordial carp that would swim up out of its pool as if about

to hum its song in unison with you. And Savorgnan is just as

sad about it, and Olga, and Squaw. With Jonas's passing away,

it's almost as if Azincourt is going to pass away soon, for it was

a living symbol of Augustus's mansion.

192

Savorgnan puts forward an initially startling proposal: to swal-

low Jonah, thus according it, as Papuan Indians do, and as a last

salutation to an animal inspiring such loving, to a fish inspiring

such adulation, to a carp inspiring such adoration, a form of

transubstantiation.

This proposal is put to a show of hands and wins, so to say,

hands down.

"Stuff it," Squaw says abruptly.

"What th . . . !!!" says Savorgnan, aghast at such incivility.

"No, no," says Squaw, calming him, "it isn't what you think.

What I'm proposing is that you stuff Jonah," adding, "You know,

I had a pal in San Francisco, Abraham Baruch. Now, notwith-

standing that, as his family had a loathing of circumcision, his

. . . his thing, you know, was still intact, Abraham, practising his

faith almost as much by whim as by conviction, had had his Bar

Mitzvah as a boy and would always visit his rabbi on Shabuoth,

Purim, Hanukkah, Sukkoth, Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah

- a good pal was this Abraham, from whom I got to know a

cunning art, that of making Gafilt-Fisch."

So, whilst Olga soaks Jonah in a sink, trying to wash out that

awful sour flavour typical of carps brought up in captivity, Squaw

starts dicing a pound of Spanish onions to boil in a pot along

with a light potpourri of garlic, tarragon, paprika, cumin and

saffron, sprinkling it all with salt, mustard and just a hint of basil,

mashing into it a sprout or two, lupin, rutabaga, asparagus and

lots of juicy stock, finally blanching it, marinating it, trussing it

and sifting it out.

Taking a small carving ax, Olga puts Jonah on a chopping

board and splits it in two with a solitary blow, abrupdy giving

out a horrifying cry.

Amaury, Savorgnan and Squaw rush forward to find out what's

going on. With a haggard look, Olga points at Augustus's chop-

ping board - on it, intact, still fascinating, brought out of Jonah's

stomach, glows that original Zahir!

1 9 3

Haig, it was now obvious, had, so long ago, out of a childish

passion for his carp, got Jonah to swallow that Zahir that Augus-

tus had worn on his pinky.

Quaking, mumbling inaudibly, frantically tugging a strand of

hair with a shaking hand, a hand now almost crimson from

Jonah's blood, lurching forward without any prior warning, Olga

falls - and falls hard!

Taking Olga's limp body in his arms, Amaury cautiously lifts

it up and lays it out on a couch, shouting wildly, "Olga's back is

out of joint - call a doctor and, if you can't find a doctor, call a

pharmacist and, if you can't find a pharmacist, call - oh, I don't

know  call a Boy Scout - call anybody at all  anybody who

can apply a cataplasm or a splint, a transfusion or a suturation,

an ablation or an adduction!"

But it's all in vain.

Olga now starts raving. Loud palpitations . . . a gradual cloud-

ing of vision . . . a croaking lung giving out a sibilant whisding

rasp . . . and a final spasm coinciding with a wish, an almost

fanatical craving, to say a last dying word. An astonishing

sound bursts forth and spurts forth, finishing in a gargling

snort.

"What? What is it?" asks Amaury.

Now, crouching down on all fours, Amaury positions his audi-

tory organ against Olga's lips, as a Huron or a Mohican would

apply his to a railway track to find out if a train was rumbling

far off.

Straining at first to grunt out a word, a word that for Amaury

is nothing but an indistinct grunt, Olga abrupdy falls back, as

limp as a rag.

Vanity, all is vanity! So it is that Olga mounts that upward

path to God's Holy City, uniting for all infinity with Douglas,

with Augustus and with Jonah.

"Did you grasp anything at all of what Olga was struggling to

say to us in that last gasp?" Savorgnan asks Amaury.

"I got a word, I think, but only a word, and a word, I must

1 9 4

admit, that I couldn't work out at all: Maldiction! Maldiction!

Maldiction! At which point Olga's articulation was so faint,

so fatally pianissimo, it brought all communication to a

full stop."

195

15

Which, notwithstanding two paragraphs full of brio

and inspiration, will draw to an ominous conclusion

"Maldiction?" asks Squaw dubiously.

"Now that isn't too hard to grasp," Savorgnan instandy affirms.

"Oh, you think so?" says Amaury.

"I don't think so, I know so. For my part, I'd say that it all

has to do with a malign trauma, a tumour, a condition, anyhow,

blanking out Olga's vocal chords, thus implying a constriction

or an inflammation inhibiting or, at worst, actually prohibiting

any possibility of diction - so 'Maldiction'."

"Hmm . . ." says Amaury, who hasn't got that at all. "But why,

at so crucial an instant, opt for such an ambiguous word?"

"Why? To inform us that, during that last ghasdy gasp, a fright-

ful constraint was muzzling, was actually strangulating, Olga: a

thirst for a Taboo that could only find satisfaction in a fit of

frustration, a fit, if you wish, of incapacity, harping on as it did,

as it had to do, again and again, ad infinitum (not attaining a

point of saturation but always in a limbo of dissatisfaction, which

is to say, always conscious that any full and final form of illumina-

tion is blinking at us, winking at us, just out of our sight, just

out of our grasp)  harping on, I say, at this solitary Malignancy,

a Malignancy assailing all of us, a Malignancy proving a cross

that all of us must carry, that Malignancy of which Haig was a

victim, its first victim, but which also did for Anton Vowl, Hassan

Ibn Abbou, Augustus and now Olga, a Malignancy causing us

agony primarily by dint of our chronic inability to call it anything,

to put a word to it, our chronic inability to do anything but sail

1 9 6

around it, again and again, without any of us knowing how, or on

which spot, to alight upon it, circumnavigating its coast, magnify-

ing its jurisdiction, its attribution, constandy having to confront

its total, global authority, without for an instant hoping that, out

of that Taboo that it's imposing on us, a word might abrupdy light

up, a noun, a sound, which, saying to us, This is your Mortality,

this your Damnation', would also say, word for word, that this

Damnation has a limit and thus a possibility of Salvation.

"Alas, this insidious circuit to which I'm alluding has no Sal-

vation. I thought, as did all of you, that Anton or Augustus was

slain trying in vain to grasp what this horror was that had struck

him down. No, not at all! Anton was slain, Augustus was slain,

for not managing to grasp it, for not howling out a tiny, insig-

nificant sound that would, for good and all, bring to an abrupt

conclusion this Saga in which all of us must play our part. It is,

I say to you, by our saying nothing, by our playing dumb, that

this Law of 'an I for an I' that's pursuing us today is still so

strong, so invincibly strong. Nobody's willing to talk about it,

to put a word to it, so causing us all to fall victim to a form of

damnation of which nothing is known. What awaits us all is a

fatality from which no man or woman in this room has any sort

of immunity, a fatality which will carry us off in our turn without

our knowing why any of us is dying, for, up against this Taboo,

going round and round it without coming out and simply naming

it (which is in fact a wholly vain ambition, for, if it actually was

said, if it actually got into print, it would abolish this narration

in which all of us, as I say, play our part, abolish, notably, a

curious anomaly distinguishing it from outwardly similar nar-

rations), nobody among us will talk about this Law that controls

us, forcing us to wallow in our own prostration, forcing us, at

last, to pass away still ignorant of that Conundrum that sustains

its propagation . . ."

"I am talking for all of us, I know," nods Amaury in approval,

"if I say that your brilliant diagnosis of our plight has had an

1 9 7

impact - I fancy a lasting impact - on us. But so many circuitous

paths! For a start, how could any of us know that that vanishing

man, that dying Anton Vowl, dying by his own hand, possibly,

or still living but in hiding  who can say?  would afflict us in

so frightful a fashion? But though I now know, as you do, that

this Law holds against us that which all of us do, that which all

of us say, that not any word of ours is what you might call

fortuitous, for it instandy and invariably has its own justification,

and thus its own signification, I can't stop thinking that I'm in

a sort of roman a tiroirs, a thick, Gothic work of fiction with lots

of plot twists and a Russian doll construction, such as Mathurin's

Monk, Jan Potocki's Manuscript Found at Saragossa and just about

any story by Hoffmann or Balzac (Balzac, that is, prior to Vau-

trin, Goriot, Pons or Rastignac)  a work in which an author's

imagination, functioning without limits and without strain, an

author, mind you, making a mighty poor living by today's stan-

dards, having to cough up a thousand words an hour for virtually

instant publication, churning out paragraph upon paragraph,

writing his daily ration of incongruous scribblings till it's coming

out of his nostrils  a work, as I say, in which an author's imagina-

tion runs so wild, in which his writing is so stylistically oudand-

ish, his plotting so absurd, of an inspiration so capricious and

inconstant, so gratuitous and instinctual, you'd think his brain

was going soft!"

"That's right," says Savorgnan in his turn. "Now you might say,

'Why, that's all just a paradox!', but I, for my own part, was so

struck by its accuracy that I would actually put it forward as not

a paradox but a paradigm, a matrix, if you wish, for all works

of fiction of today. To intuit an imagination without limits, an

imagination aspiring to infinity, adding (or possibly subtracting)

to (or from) its quasi-cosmic ambition a crucial factor, an

astoundingly innovatory kind of linguistic originality running

through it from start to finish, as a word, 'Brighton', say, might

run through a stick of rock, what you imply is that such a work

198

of fiction could not allow a solitary lazy or random or fortuitous

word, no approximation, no padding and no nodding; that, con-

trarily, its author has rigorously to sift all his words  I say, //,

from nouns down to lowly conjunctions  as if totally bound by

a rigid, cast-iron law!"

"Thus," murmurs Amaury, waxing almost lyrical, "oblivious

of this inhibition that's thinning out our capacity to talk, is born

Imagination - as a chain of many, of so uncountably many, links;

and thus too is born Inspiration, born out of a twisting path that

all of us must follow if any of us is to ink in, to stain with black,

if only for an instant, and with a solitary word, any word at all,

our own Manuscript's immaculation!"

Squaw, finding it a bit alarming that Amaury should hold forth

in such an abstract fashion, abruptly says, "Now just hold on! I

pity you, Amaury. How can you talk about books and such with

Olga's body still warm!"

"Oh, God, you must think I'm a callous lout, Squaw! I'm sorry,

so awfully sorry," says Amaury, blushing with mortification.

"It's this room that's doing it," says Savorgnan, looking around

him in mild agitation. "It's got a sort of morbid quality, don't

you think? Is anybody for moving out?"

"No," says Squaw, "you can't go. Think - Aloysius Swann is

now on his way to Azincourt and his contribution will assist us

all in working out just what's going on. And if, as I think, Aloy-

sius took his car, you can count on his turning up by nightfall.

My proposal is that you wait for his arrival whilst dining, for,

what with all our discussions, nobody's had anything all day to

put in his stomach."

What Squaw cooks is suitably light and frugal, for, although

naturally hungry, Savorgnan's low spirits won't allow him to

think of gorging on what is laid out in front of him. Amaury is

similarly downcast, simply picking at his food, nibbling it without

any of his usual gusto.

1 9 9

"I know how hard it is for you to stop thinking of poor Olga,"

says Squaw at last, "but I insist that you both try this first-class

gorgonzola, a gorgonzola of which Augustus was so fond, I

occasionally had to go out at night to buy it from our local dairy

if our supply had run o u t . . . "

But nobody lays a hand on Augustus's gorgonzola, or on

Squaw's cold roast ham or chaussons farcis a la Chantilly.

As Savorgnan complains of an aching brow, as if his brain had

a thick lining of cotton wool, Squaw starts making him an

infusion and has him swallow an aspirin. At which point, lying

down on a couch, Savorgnan tactfully asks if Amaury wouldn't

mind slipping out, informing him of his wish to catch forty winks.

Amaury, for his part, avid to find out if, at Azincourt, a copy

or a manuscript or a rough draft isn't lying around, anything

that might furnish additional information, ransacks Augustus's

library, unloading boxfuls of books and spilling out in disarray

hardbacks and softbacks, works of fact and works of fiction,

biography and autobiography.

His scrutiny proving all in vain, Amaury finally thinks of taking

a turn around Azincourt's lush grounds. It's a starry, scintillating

night, not too hot, not too cold - in fact, just right. Amaury

lights up a long, luxuriously aromatic cigar, a Havana found

whilst casually rummaging in Augustus's smoking room, and idly

strolls about, along this pathway and that, inhaling a lungful of

virginal night air that adds a faint whiff of opopanax to his cigar.

Who would think - who, truly, would think - that in such a

halcyon spot, in such a park, with all its occupants, its plants as

much as its animals and birds, living in total, natural harmony,

so many atrocious killings could occur? Who would think to find

damnation lurking in such an Arcadia?

Far off, an owl hoots. Without his knowing why, but probably

through a chain of unconscious associations, this owl, Pallas's

bird, so it's said, calls to his mind a book from long, long ago,

no doubt from his youth, a work of fiction that also had an

2 0 0

allusion to a park in which Damnation would triumph, a public

park that it would finally claim as its own.

But, goddammit, what book was it? In his mind, its infiltrator

was at last thrust out, with no kindly Good Samaritan rushing

to assist him, and his carcass thrown into a gaping pit.

Amaury sits for about a half-hour in a mossy arbour, not far

from that tall acacia with its swaying fronds producing a dull but

continuous sound, a murmur soft and low, a humming sigh that's

both sibilant and soporific.

His inability to grasp just what it is that insidiously links a

book out of his past with his situation now is driving him crazy.

Was it in fact a work of fiction? And didn't Anton Vowl claim

long ago that a work of fiction would contain a solution to his

plight? An amorphous mass of books and authors bombards his

brain. Moby Dick? Malcolm Lowry? Van Vogt's Saga ofNon-Af

Or that work by Roubaud that Gallimard brought out, with a

logo, so to say, of a 3 as shown in a mirror? Aragon's Blanc ou

l'Oubli>. Un Grand Cri Vain? La Disparition? Or Adair's transla-

tion of it?

Amaury starts, conscious of a chill night wind.

Standing up, taking a last puff on his cigar and idly throwing

away its butt, a tiny glow-worm that wanly lights up Azincourt

for a passing instant, Amaury, abrupdy struck, during just that

instant, by a frisson of unfamiliarity with his surroundings (no

swaying acacia in sight, no stony path to assist him in finding

his way back, but a soft plush lawn), fumblingly lights a match

(but its spark burns out too soon to do much good), consults

his watch (which says 11.40 but, alas, isn't ticking as it should)

and, now a bit jumpy, with palpitations causing a slight pain in

his ribs, starts cursing.

Groping blindly, Amaury walks forward, not only bumping

into a wall but also falling into a shallow pit (in which, as is

instandy obvious to him, Augustus caught all that morning damp

with which Squaw would fill his lustral baths) and, totally lost,

2 0 1

stumbling into a clump of shrubs that has a strong aroma of

blackcurrant commingling with that, as strong if hardly as

fragrant, of thuja, shrubs that scratch his arms in his frantic

strivings to stop a rash of thorns from snagging his clothing.

Just as Amaury, in a now almost paranoid condition, is starting

to think of its park as a sadistic labyrinth laid out as it is to

imprison him, Augustus's mansion at last looms mistily up. It's

pitch-black, with not a light burning in any window, on any floor

at all, so that it has an oddly forlorn, almost ghosdy look about

it, as though not housing a living soul.

"Now, now, nothing at all to worry about. Probably just a

short-circuit," murmurs Amaury, groping along a dark corridor

until finally arriving in a small drawing room and lying down on

a divan, shaking, worn out, numb with shock.

Not a sound around him.

An alarm, faint at first but soon disturbingly loud, starts ringing

in Amaury's brain. "What's going on? What's Savorgnan up to?

And Squaw? And Aloysius Swann - didn't Squaw say Swann

would turn up tonight?"

A wholly irrational panic now grips him by his throat, causing a

wild, stabbing pain in his back and making his brow go hot and

cold in turn.

A moan. "I know  I know - it's food poisoning! It was that

ham I had tonight - or Augustus's bloody gorgonzola - it was

off. I thought it was a bit gamy -1 thought it had a funny, rancid

odour  only I didn't want to say anything to Squaw!"

Whilst rushing into Augustus's bathroom to look in its first-aid

kit for a cordial or a syrup, anything to bring on instant vomiting,

a suspicion abruptly assails him: what if a drop of poison was

put in his whisky?

"Now that I think of it, it had a flavour of . . . a flavour of

. . . oh God, I just know it was burnt almonds! It's my turn!

Why, naturally, that's it! I'm going to . . . it's going to . . ."

2 0 2

If Amaury is mumbling and bumbling and crying out in this

awful fashion, it is, alas, simply for want of knowing against

whom or what to bring an accusation.

Such is his anguish, his mind is continually at risk of sinking

into a coma. But, dragging his limp body forward with a strain

that's almost inhuman, gasping, choking, sobbing, sobbing as an

infant might sob, and cursing his long, stubborn opposition to

submitting his body to mithridatisation, as his chums constantly

told him to do, Amaury finally crawls out again into a dark

corridor.

Is this it? Is this his last gasp? A fortissimo No!!! - that is his

oath. By hook or by crook, by drinking gallons of milk or by

taking an antibiotic, Amaury still trusts in his own survival. And

in a flash it occurs to him that, upstairs, in a boxroom adjoining

a studio that Augustus had put at Savorgnan's disposal, is a flask

of Homatropini hydrobromidum

H3C - CH - CH3

N - CH3 CHO-CO-CHOH-C6H5, BrH

H3C - CH - CH3

that will pull him through this crisis.

So, still groping, still in pain, grimly clinging to its rail, Amaury

climbs, rung by rung, that dark and narrow stairway that spirals

up to Azincourt's top floor . . .

2 0 3

V

AMAURY CONSON

21

In which, following a pithy summary of our plot so far,

a fourth fatality will occur, that of a man who has had

a significant part to play in this book

Around midnight, having brought Ottavio Ottaviani along for

moral support, Aloysius Swann finally draws up at Azincourt.

Having, that morning, quit his commissariat, Faubourg Saint-

Martin (which has a vault containing all official information

involving Anton Vowl and his vanishing act), and driving his

Ford Mustang as quickly as Fangio, as Stirling Moss, Jim Clark

or Brabham, Swann was hoping to park it in front of Augustus's

mansion by dusk. But it was almost as if a playful hobgoblin was

trying to bar his path with what you might call avatars ( avatars,

naturally, signifying mishaps or, in fiction, plot twists [viz. Bloch and Wartburg, Dauzat and Thomas], for no Hindu communicant

with Vishnu would think of applying to a man as pragmatic as

Swann notions as holy as incarnation, transformation and tran-

substantiation). On as many as six occasions his car was to stall,

forcing poor Ottaviani to labour long and arduously to put things

right again, that labour consisting in his scrutinising it in its

totality, point by point, from its chassis to its piston, from its

hood to its transmission.

On top of which, it would skid into a ditch, a ditch that, luckily

for both, was fairly shallow.

And, to cap that, it had collisions with, in turn, a chick (which

was crossing a road, but don't ask why), a cat, a puppy with

short, frizzy hair and a soulful look and, worst of all, a child of

2 0 7

six, a casualty that would prompt such a scandal that for an instant

Swann was afraid of a lynching party.

"Ouf!" says Ottaviani, whilst Swann pulls to a halt in a billow

of hot air. "Azincourt at last! And not an hour too soon!"

"For my own part," says his companion, looking around dubi-

ously, "I can't stop thinking it's possibly a bit too tardy. Look -

not a glint of light on any floor. It all looks so dark, as if totally

vacant."

"Now now," says Ottaviani, assuring his boss, "it's just that

nobody's up and about, that's all."

"Rubbish! What an odd hour to turn in! I told Savorgnan I

was on my way  was it too much to ask him to stay up for my

arrival?"

"Knock anyway, why don't you," says Ottaviani, trying to stay

cool.

Swann raps his fist hard on Augustus's front door and waits

. . . and waits . . . and waits. But nobody unlocks it.

"I told you so. Not a living soul," says Swann, blanching in

horror; but, almost instandy taking that back, and squinting

ambiguously at his companion, adds, "No, I was wrong. Living

in this mansion is a solitary individual, but an individual, in my

opinion, as dozy and as drunk as a Polack."

Obviously unfamiliar with Swann's allusion, Ottaviani says,

"Don't panic now"; and, applying all his physical might to a thick

partition in front of him, forcing a bolt in its clamp and, with

his stick, a stick with a razor-sharp point, shoving Augustus's

door, and in particular its flap, as far back as its doorstop will

allow, finally wins through.

"That's that! Why don't you and I just go in?" says a trium-

phant if slighdy jumpy Ottaviani, who starts cautiously inching

forward, whilst a quailing Swann, still visibly in a condition of

shock, timorously follows him. Abruptly, though, Squaw looms

up, carrying a small oil-lamp that glows with a dim and dusky

half-light.

"So wasn't I right?" says Ottaviani to his boss. "It was

2 0 8

unworthy of you to flip your lid as you did! Good old faithful

Squaw!"

"Hallo," says Squaw, not putting much warmth into it. "You

know, I had to hang about for you two all night!"

"You don't sound in high spirits, Squaw," says Swann. "What's

up?"

"Augustus cashing in his chips, that's what's up!"

"But I know all about that!"

"Uh huh, but Olga too!"

Ottaviani's jaw drops. "Olga!!"

"That's right, Olga, and not only Olga but Jonah!!"

"Jonah too!" shouts Ottaviani, "Why, that's - that's awful! I

- Hold on, who's Jonah? I don't know any Jonah."

"You do too," Swann cuts in a bit childishly. "Jonah is - that's

to say, Jonah was - Augustus's carp."

"Oh . . . is that a fact?" murmurs Ottaviani thickly, not grasp-

ing why anybody would think of naming a fish as insignificant

as a carp.

"But who? And what? And how?" says Swann, harassing

Squaw, who has hardly got a word in up to now.

"You'll find out all about it in an instant," Squaw finally gasps,

"but first," unlocking a door, "why don't you sit down in this

drawing room and I'll pour you out a hot drink, for this wintry

morning air is going to chill you through and through."

It's as dark in Azincourt as in a tomb.

"It was a short-circuit," says Squaw to Ottaviani. "I think a

plug has blown but, for all that I sought to work out which was

faulty, I'm afraid I still don't know. In addition, Azincourt has

no such thing as a torch or a gas-lamp or a flashlight or a Davy

lamp - nothing, in fact, but this poor apology for a light that

I'm holding up in front of you."

"Oh, not to worry, Squaw," says Ottaviani with his usual affa-

bility. "Aloysius and I can follow what you say just as comfortably

by night - I don't think dawn's too far off now, anyway."



* * *

2 0 9

As if blindly, Swann and Ottaviani accompany Squaw into

Augustus's smoking room. And it's in that room, with its oil-lamp

giving off both a sickly halo and a suffocating aroma, that Squaw

finally fills our two cops in on that salvo of mortal blows that

has struck down Augustus and his companions.

Amaury Conson's arrival, along with Arthur Wilbur

Savorgnan;

A mass of information involving Anton Vowl's vanishing;

Anton's diary;

Augustus's album;

Savorgnan's virginal tanka on its black "kaolin" card;

Anton's transcription, for Olga, of six oddly familiar

madrigals, all of which Augustus thinks of paraphrasing

in a disturbing fashion;

Augustus dying that ominous morning, abruptiy crying

out "A Zahir!" whilst going out to drop grain into

Jonah's pool;

Augustus's Zahir and its Saga;

Haig's apparition following Tryphiodorus's arrival;

Othon Lippmann's faith;

Augustus's morning purification in his lustral bath;

His Zahir vanishing;

Othon Lippmann dying;

Haig's vocation;

His blank inscription on Augustus's billiard board;

Haig running away from Azincourt;

Anton Vowl's apparition;

Haig's damnation;

Albin's family and its stock;

His passion for Anastasia;

Anastasia dying whilst giving birth to Olga;

Albin slain by Othon;

Anton both transcribing and translating that inscription,

that "Katoun", found on Augustus's billiard board;

2 1 0

Haig dying in Urbino, for which a handful of motivations

is put forward;

Olga's affair with Anton;

Anton vanishing on finding out that Tryphiodorus is his

papa and thus Haig his kin;

Jonah, Haig's carp, dying of starvation;

Cooking a Gafilt-Fisch;

Olga slitting Jonah in two, finding that horrifying Zahir;

Olga's fatal fall and dying murmur of "Maldiction!"

"And that," says Squaw in conclusion, "is a straightforward

chronology of a jinx which is clinging to us all and which, only

today, has struck again and again and again!"

"Hmm," says Swann, "that was an admirably succinct sum-

mary, I must say. But, now I think of it, why isn't my old buddy

Amaury with us? And Arthur?"

"Savorgnan was complaining of a stabbing pain in his brow

and lay down; as for Amaury, I saw him taking a long stroll

around Azincourt - around its grounds, I should say  and I

think his plan was to turn in on finishing it. I don't doubt you'll

find both upstairs, snoring away."

"But you'd think my knocking would bring both downstairs

again. God knows, I was making an uproar!"

"In my opinion," says Squaw, "Savorgnan is just too numb,

as is Amaury, for any sound to snap him out of his stupor - I

doubt that a witch's bacchanalia on a Sabbath night would do it."

"It's most important, though, that both Amaury and Savorg-

nan join us right now," murmurs Swann. "Do you know if, in

Azincourt, I can put my hands on a tuba or a sax, a bassoon or

a pair of cymbals, a tom-tom or a bongo drum?"

"No, but you might try this horn," says Squaw, picking up off

a tall stand a hunting horn, a paragon of a horn, a horn to kill

for, half of it in ivory, half in brass, dating from about AD 1000.

(It's said, although it's probably just a folk-myth, that a paladin

known as Alaric, a vassal of Clodion, who had such an abundant

2 1 1

crop of hair that his companions-at-arms would call him Samson,

was willing, at a council of local barons, and whilst in his cups,

was willing, as I say, to assign his own position at Clodion's

court, along with all its rights and favours, to any man who could

draw a satisfying roar out of his horn [all of this occurring,

naturally, in a dark fairy-story wood]. Taking him at his word, an

urchin, a skinny ragamuffin, a poor rustic, a common bondsman,

stood forward, took Alaric's horn in his own horny hands and,

blowing into it with as much might as a Tyrolian blowing into

a horn to call his cows in, got from it a sound of an astonishing

purity, a sound, though, so sharp that it split Alaric's tympanum

in two. This was profoundly gratifying to Alaric's lord [Clodion,

so rumour had it, was afraid of Alaric and thought of him not

as a vassal but as an out-and-out rival], who, instandy, and pooh-

poohing this word of warning from his bodyguard:

A bondsman crown'd will down you,

A bondsman down'd will crown you!

had his unwitting champion brought to him, making him his

minion, knighting him, giving him his own fair cousin's hand in

matrimony, along with a mansion, a stronghold in Gascony and

six high-ranking positions at court, and publicly proclaiming that,

just as Roland would always accompany Carolus Magnus, so

would his young knight always accompany him.

Alas and alack for Alaric and his lass! Within just four days it

would turn out that Hilarion, as Alaric's darling was known, if

indubitably skilful at blowing horns, was totally ignorant of tilt-

ing and jousting, drawing an arrow across a longbow and training

a hawk or a falcon. Caught in a skirmish with a dwarfish but

surprisingly spry Arab, who was attacking him with a scimitar,

Hilarion, a bit of a show-off, had a wild stab at knocking him

down with a solitary mortal blow, but his swordsmanship was

so clumsy that it was his own body that was run through!)



* * *

2 1 2

Squinting as doubtfully at Augustus's horn as a conscript at an

Amati or a Stradivarius, and giving out a profound sigh, Swann

blows into its brassy spiral of piping but, obtaining only a croaky,

slighdy mournful hiss, shouts out a furious "Shitr!", a notorious

oath from Jarry's Ubu Rot that's still fairly common, from

Aurillac to Saint-Flour, from Puy Mary to Mauriac, in Cantal -

in which district Swann was born and in which his family is

ubiquitous.

Bragging a bit, blowing his own horn, so to say, Ottaviani

asks for a turn, saying that, in his youth, hunting stags, wild

boar, aurochs and izards around Niolo, in its dark woods and

along its scrubby hills, had taught him to how to play it. Cockily

taking hold of Augustus's horn, twirling it around his hand as

though it was as light as a baton thrown up by a drum-major

in a dazzling rotating motion, and producing from it, with

an amazing lack of huffing and puffing, a sonorous, wholly

satisfying sound, Ottaviani actually starts improvising, and not

without aplomb, a potpourri of military music.

Squaw wildly applauds him. "Bravo! Bravo! Bravissimo!"

"All right, all right, that'll do," says Swann, who, visibly grudg-

ing Ottaviani his triumph, put out at having his own mortifying

incapacity shown up, is hoping to play down his assistant's skill,

communicating to him by a dirty look how untactful it was of

him, not to say suspicious, as an adjutant, a right-hand man, to

flaunt his gift for music whilst all his boss could obtain was a

sound as musical as a duck's fart!

"Okay, boss, okay," Ottaviani sighs, compliant but inwardly

raging.

"Anyhow, what's important is our two companions. I did all

I could - you too, Ottavio," adds Swann, now in a conciliatory

mood, "- to stir up Arthur and Amaury. But, I'm afraid, to no

avail."

In truth, nothing at all occurs for a long instant. Gradually,

though, a sound floats down as if from a distant attic, a dragging

2 1 3

sound as of a ghost laboriously pulling his chains, slowly, pain-

fully, making his way downstairs, flip-flop, clip-clop.

And now Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan turns up, limp, numb,

puffy, clumsy, haggard, sluggish, not at all on form.

"Good Lord," says Savorgnan, mumbling thickly, "Ottavio!

What th' fuck you doing in this joint?"

"Now now, Arthur," says Swann, "don't talk rot. I told you

all I was coming with Ottaviani."

Without saying a word, looking practically punch-drunk,

Savorgnan rubs his cranium, blows out two big gobs of snot by

holding his thumb against his nostrils and, spying a divan, drags

his body to it, lays it out across it and starts noisily snoring.

"Oh, grant him his catnap," says Swann. "It's Amaury I'm

most anxious about  for, without wishing to alarm you with a

ghasdy prognosis, all my information adds up to his dying

tonight!"

A cry from Squaw. "Amaury dying! But why?"

"Why! Why! Always why!" groans Swann. "Oh God, why

always this wish to find a motivation in mortality? Amaury is out

of it, that's all I know! His bio won't turn up in any Who's





Who!"

"But how can anybody know such a thing? How did you find

out?"

It was soon obvious (says Swann) that Amaury was about to fall

victim in his turn.

This is how it was. Ottaviani and I got to Noyon, all in. Our

first stop was its commissariat, to find out if it had a communi-

cation for us from Paris. I got a radiogram from a man on duty

and quickly took it in:

P A R I S . S I X T H M A Y . M I D D A Y . F O U N D O U T

A B O U T P A S S I N G A W A Y O F Y V O N C O N S O N I N

P A R O S . S T O P . C O N F I R M A T I O N P O I N T B Y

P O I N T A T Y O U R D I S P O S A L I N A R R A S . S T O P .

2 1 4

I got into my car and took off for Arras, arriving only at nightfall,

as my road was oddly full of mishaps of all kinds. I ran to, I

almost burst into, its local station, so avid was I for information,

but all I found on duty was a lisping nincompoop who wouldn't

stop talking, who didn't know what I was talking about and who

was actually angling for a tip, a commission, a payoff! For a tip,

all I was willing to accord him was a crack across his jaw with my

walking-stick, but it took us two hours to obtain our radiogram

confirming Yvon's passing away, a radiogram stuck away in a

vault that was horribly difficult to unlock.

I found out thus that Amaury's son, sailing from Harwich on

board a catamaran flying an Irish flag, plying along Istanbul's

Adriatic coast, had cast anchor off Naxos, and finally off Paros,

on which island it was his aim to stay all autumn, passing his

nights on board, going into Paros by day and roving around.

About six nights ago, in his usual fashion, Yvon thought to pop

into a dingy local bar, a honky-tonk saloon for dockhands and

sailors. Its barman, a man known only as Cock, got his kicks

from watching his patrons slip into a coma, giving a gut-rotting

glass of hooch to a sailor who was asking for a raki, a glass of

bathtub gin to a dockhand who thought it was hock, and not

plonking down a Chianti without first lacing it with a soporific

drug.

Almost as soon as Yvon sat down, a unknown man was stand-

ing in front of him, daring him to play backgammon for his

catamaran.

"If you want," said Yvon, "but not backgammon."

"All right," said his companion, "what do you want to play?"

Proposing, in turn, pontoon, blackjack, Tarot, gin rummy,

canasta, pairs, brag and old maid, Yvon finally took him up on

a round or two of zanzi, a quaint local variation on crap shooting.

An initial roll had him throwing a four against a King.

"Okay," said his antagonist, grimacing, "you won that round."

"I did?" said Yvon, dumbstruck. "But I had a four whilst you

had a King!"

2 1 5

'That's right. . . But don't you know our local saying? A King

first round is out of bounds."

"I'm sorry," said Yvon calmly but firmly, "nothing doing. That

was yours or it's all off!"

"As you wish, it's your hard luck," said this curious individual

with a harsh, rasping laugh, whilst picking up, touching,

stroking, kissing, clicking, blowing on, rattling and finally

rolling his craps - coming up on this occasion with a trio of

Kings!

"Confound it!" said Yvon out loud but thinking inwardly: This

guy's obviously a bit of a con man, but his is a trick that two can

play!

So, in his turn, stroking, kissing, rattling and so on, Yvon also

cast a trio of Kings!

"Rampot!" (which is what you cry at a draw in zanzi).

Not a man in that room but that didn't approach to watch

what was going on.

"Shunt!" said Yvon's antagonist, an ugly rictus disfiguring his

lips. "It's a rampot. How do you want to play it? On points? On

pairs? On all-for-nothing?"

"On all-for-nothing," said Yvon coldly.

An icy, spooky, malignant aura was wafting about him and

causing a chill to run up and down his back.

Nobody is drinking now! Nobody is saying a word! Not a pin

drops!

As though unconscious of having brought all activity to a

standstill, Yvon lit up a cigar with his usual sang-froid, drank

down his glass of aquavit and said, "It's your go, I think."

Inhaling profoundly, his antagonist slowly, warily, shook his

craps in his fist and, again producing a King, said with a loud

guffaw, "Okay, laughing boy, match that if you can."

Yvon, whistling nonchalandy, cast his any old how, but Lady

Luck was smiling on him and also brought him a King.

"A draw." This said by Yvon calmly and softly.

"A draw?!! No way! It's a rampot! You and I gotta rampot!"

2 1 6

"Oh, fuck off, will you," said Yvon, "that's it for now!"

But, a blind fury consuming him, Yvon's antagonist caught

him by his throat and, pulling out a Spanish poniard, stuck it up

to its hilt into his stomach, causing Yvon, who fought against it

but in vain, instandy to succumb!

"Awful as it is," says Squaw, "to think of so charming a young

man dying in that fashion, I must.. ."

Swann butts in. "Yvon? A charming young man? A thorough-

going rascal, I'd say!"

"Okay, Aloysius, just as you wish," says Squaw. "But what I

want to know is why Amaury has to fall victim along with his

son?"

"You'll soon find out," says Swann, "for it's a most important

point in this affair, a point on which, although I'm not totally

ignorant, my grasp is still, alas, much too patchy, with too many

missing links. Now, though, what if you and I and Ottavio go

and find out what Amaury's up to?"

Abandoning poor old Savorgnan to his forty (or fifty or sixty)

winks, Swann, Ottavio and Squaw start going through Azincourt

with a toothcomb. But on no cot, no bunk, no divan, no sofa and

no armchair is Amaury found, living or not. As for Augustus's

imposing baldaquin, which Squaw had put at his disposal, it

looks as trim and tidy as if nobody had got into it that night. In

fact, it's almost as if Amaury hadn't put a foot in Azincourt at

all.

But what Squaw finds, on a partition wall of a boxroom adjoin-

ing that studio that Amaury was put into four nights ago to rally

from his alcoholic stupor, is a whitish Bristol board stuck up with

four tintacks - a board displaying 25 or 26 portrait photographs,

photographs most probably cut out of a tabloid journal, a Paris-

Jour or a Daily Mirror or a Historia or a Tit-Bits.

Coming out of this boxroom, Squaw instandy calls to Swann,

who is busily rummaging through a cupboard.

2 1 7

"Just look at this, Aloysius! 25 or possibly 26 photos which

might put a hint or two our way!"

Always on duty, always, so to say, at his post, Swann joins

Squaw to study this intriguing board.

"Hmm. But, say, Squaw, how do you know Amaury put this

up?"

"Nobody but Amaury had any opportunity of doing so,"

affirms Squaw. "Four days ago I had to find accommodation at

Azincourt for Amaury and Arthur, with both of whom Olga was

avid to discuss our affairs, and I brought four pillows from this

room, four matching pillowslips, two quilts, a handful of wash-

cloths, that sort of thing. But I must say - and you know I'm

not a liar - I saw no board, no photographs, on this partition."

"I could," says Swann thoughtfully, "point to a host of indi-

viduals in this display whom I know to look at, but I'm struck

by four - no, six - with whom I'm totally unfamiliar, and this

guy in particular I want to find out about."

So saying, Swann points at a portrait of a skinny man with

long, curly, slightiy wispy hair, thick hairy brows, a dark, bushy

chin and an ugly, narrow gash scarring his lips. Sporting a woolly

cardigan with four buttons on top of an Oxford smock without

a collar, our man has a faindy folksy look about him, calling to

mind a zingaro or a gypsy, a carny or a Mongol, but also (switch-

ing to a wholly distinct mythology and iconography) a hippy

strumming his guitar in a barroom in Haight-Ashbury or at Big

Sur or in Katmandu.

Swann calls out to Ottaviani, who's nosing about at random

not far off. It's said, among cops, that Ottaviani, a bit of a robot

but unfailingly loyal and hardworking, could fix in his brain for

good any individual crossing his path.

"Ottavio," says Swann, jabbing at his snapshot with his thumb.

"This put you in mind of anybody you know?"

"No, sir!" says Ottaviani instandy and unambiguously. "Any-

way, it looks as if it was shot long ago."

"Hmm, that's a point," Swann admits. "I'm going back down

2 1 8

to ask Arthur, as I'm obviously drawing a blank with you and

Squaw."

Swann quickly rips off Amaury's photo, which was stuck on

with a tack, and, following Squaw, with Ottaviani in tow, taps

on Savorgnan's door, looks in without making a sound, confirms

that his chum is still snoring away and murmurs:

"Shhh! Our Arthur's dozing so soundly I don't want to knock

him up. Actually, I fancy a mug of cocoa and possibly a fruit or

-1 don't know - bacon on toast? Can you do that for us, Squaw,

for our work's cut out for us tonight?"

So Squaw brings in two mugs of hot cocoa which Swann and

Ottaviani soon gulp down with lots of noisy lip-smacking. Swann

dunks almost half of a crusty, oblong loaf into his mug, whilst

Ottaviani puts a thick coating of apricot jam on his croissant.

Night is gradually fading at last. A cloudy, misty day is dawn-

ing, giving Azincourt's dining room a dispiritingly wan and pallid

look. It stinks of cold tobacco.

"Good God!" says Ottaviani in disgust. 'This room is suffo-

cating!"

"What you want," says Squaw, unlocking a window, "is a

lungful of cold air."

Swann and Ottaviani start, caught in a gust of sharp if invigor-

ating morning air. Savorgnan, for his part, abrupdy waking up

and rubbing his palms with a loud "Brrrr . . .", jumps up off his

divan, puffy, groggy, his hair all tously, his clothing in disarray,

his look still as haggard as it was, and groans, "What? It isn't

morning, is it?"

Although sniffing hungrily at Swann's mug of cocoa, Savorg-

nan insists first of all on having his morning bath. So Squaw

shows him to Augustus's own sumptuous, marbly bathroom,

from which Savorgnan almost instantly struts out again, grin-

ning, having had his bath and put on a crisp pair of slacks, a

stylish polo shirt and a playboy's polka-dot scarf.

Swann instandy, and anxiously, confronts him.

2 1 9

"What do you know about Amaury?"

"Amaury Conson,' says Savorgnan blundy, drawing his hand

across his chin, "is kaput."

2 2 0



21

In which you will find an old family custom obliging

a brainy youth to finish his Gradus ad Parnassum

with six killings

"Amaury Conson is kaput," says Savorgnan again. "If you want

to find his body, it's in a stockroom, floating in a gigantic basin

of oil."

"You saw him?" asks Swann.

"No - thanks to that damn short-circuit. But what I was con-

scious of was his dying cry - a long-drawn-out cry that'll haunt

my mind till my own dying day, particularly as it was blown up

by acoustics that would amplify a dropping pin into practically

atomic proportions - right up to a final splash. At that point I

had no doubt at all as to his lot!"

"But how? Or, should I say, why did Amaury fall? You didn't

push him, did you?"

"Oh, I was willing to if I had to," admits Savorgnan, vainly

trying to mask his pain, "but, jumping at my throat, Amaury

found his foot skidding, swung back and forth for an instant and

finally lost his foothold. I saw him falling right in. It was as

though I was actually watching gravity at work!"

"But why would Amaury think of attacking you?"

Savorgnan sighs but, almost as though sulking, as though at

a loss for words, says nothing to this.

Swann now pulls out his photograph and, holding it up in

front of Savorgnan, says to him, with an intimidating scowl,

"This is why, isn't it? It was this photo that brought him to such

a pass! You got him to look at it, didn't you?"

2 2 1

No (says Savorgnan), it was totally fortuitous that Amaury

found it, in a cupboard in my room. This is how it was. Last

night Amaury took a turn around Azincourt but, in doing so,

got lost, finally making his way back indoors by about midnight.

Squaw didn't stay up for him and nor did I. It was pitch-black.

Amaury, his brow throbbing madly, lay down on a sofa, possibly

nodding off but almost instantly jumping up again, suffocating,

panicking without knowing why, and in pain, in ghastly pain,

thinking wild, crazy, paranoid thoughts about individuals trying

to kill him, lacing his drink with poison, thinking, too, that I

had a flask of Homatropini hydrobromidum in my room that

might pick him up and pull him through. So Amaury, going

upstairs without waking anybody, bursting into that boxroom

that, as you know, adjoins my room and rummaging through it,

found this photograph and, as if throwing off his pain, and giving

out an agonising cry, roaring, "That photograph!", caught my

throat in his two clammy hands.

At that point Amaury quickly took off again, mumbling and

grumbling inaudibly, to his own room; but, still running, was

back in a flash, holding a Bristol board in his hand, a board with

26 subdivisions, 26 units, all of which had a portrait photograph

- all, that is, but for a solitary blank unit.

"It wasn't blank till now," said Amaury. 'That photograph that

you hold in your hand was stuck," - pointing at it  "in this fifth

unit that's now vacant. A burglar took it from my flat, almost

thirty springs ago this April. Although I was both sad and

angry at such a stupid act of criminality, I admit I thought

it at first fairly trivial and hardly worth worrying about. But,

within just four days of my loss, my son Aignan lay dying in

Oxford!"

A sob rising uncontrollably to his throat brought his accusation

to a halt.

"Amaury," I said in my turn, as kindly as I could, "that photo-

graph that you found in my boxroom isn't yours. It's my own,

and it always was. You must trust your old pal."

2 2 2

"But . . . but what's this all about?" said Amaury, now visibly

brought up short.

"Isn't it obvious?" said I. "My photograph's a copy of yours!"

"You had this man's photograph, too?"

"That's right."

"But why?"

"Just cast your mind back to as many as four occasions on

which I'd drop hints as to how oddly similar my biography, so

to say, was to yours. Two of a kind, branching off from a common

trunk - our pasts not simply similar but matching up point by

point - that's you and I, Amaury!"

Amaury cut in. "I do call to mind your dropping such hints.

And it was always on my mind to ask you about it all, in privacy.

In fact, I was counting on you to pass on any such information

that you had on our kinship, or on that conundrum which is my

past and about which, alas, I know almost nothing. But our

discussion was so long I couldn't find an opportunity to talk to

you about it. Past midnight as it is, I don't think it's right for

you now to hold off laying all your cards out, without flinching,

without holding anything back . . ."

I took this on board, although adding:

"As you wish. But not in this room. It's too dark and it's too

cold. Why don't you and I pop down to Augustus's cosy smoking

room? A stiff drink might warm us up."

"Okay," said Amaury. "You go downstairs. I'll follow you in

just a tick."

At which point, our companion hastily ran off, his hand clasp-

ing his Bristol board of photographs.

So I was first in Augustus's smoking room. I hung around for

almost half-an-hour, drinking a glass of first-class aquavit.

Abrupdy, I was struck by a loud din coming from downstairs.

I ran as fast as I could but I still had to go fairly slowly, gropingly,

as it was as black as tar. I got downstairs, though, without

stumbling too much, and saw, in a sort of gloomy, glowing

2 2 3

chiaroscuro, Amaury stuffing a substantial manuscript into a

gigantic kiln - substantial, that is, by dint of how thick it was.

With a frisson of suspicion, I could not but cry out, "What is

that - that manuscript that's almost burnt to a crisp?"

Amaury, furious, visibly not caring to say anything that I might

find incriminating, at first took a long look at his manuscript -

a manuscript that was now turning brown, and now black, and

now shrinking and curling up - and finally sat down on a folding

chair, pointing out a tall stool in front of it and proposing that

I sit on that.

"Okay, Arthur, you want to talk. So talk."

"Now? In this stockroom?" I said, looking around doubtfully.

"I . . . I was waiting for you in Augustus's smoking room."

"No," said Amaury, with an obstinacy that I was starting to

find a bit irritating. "Start talking now."

"But why?"

"You can't say it's dark in this room - or cold - or . . . "

I stuck to my guns.

"Or what? What's wrong with you?"

"Nothing. Just sit down and talk. If not. . ."

"If not . . . what?"

"It's our only opportunity . . ."

Naturally, I found his conduct intriguing and, struck by his

obstinacy, I had no option but to humour him. So I sat down,

lit a cigar and got down to brass tacks:

"I'd always said that a day would dawn on which I'd inform

you of my Saga - and this is it. You'll also find out that it's a

story involving you as much as yours truly. That Damnation

that's pursuing you is on my trail too. Its shadow is falling on

both of us. My blood is yours, Amaury, for my papa is also

yours!"

"What!" said Amaury, aghast. "You and I - siblings!"

"Just so. Siblings in a common affliction and a common

fatality!"

2 2 4

"But how did you find this out?" said Amaury, now avid to

know, to drink his poison to its last drop. "Who told you this

thing of which I was told nothing?"

"Oh, I long had a faint intuition of it, of this baffling fact, this

fact that nobody had any guts to talk about, this fact about which,

in truth, nobody had any information at all, and it took much

of my youth and adulthood to find out what I could about it,

building supposition upon supposition, trying out idiotic

assumptions, drawing hasty conclusions, computing, calculating,

imagining, filling in bit by bit this mystifying jigsaw, this

intimidating taboo, in which, as I was conscious, a solution was

hiding.

"What a lot of work I put into building a circuit of possibly

fruitful contacts  paying a bunch of lazy, parasitical informants

on a monthly basis, bribing librarians to drag out any old and

musty parish roll just as long as it might contain information

about my family background, buttonholing all sorts of corrupt

public officials, politicians, solicitors, councillors, diplomats,

administrators, assistant administrators and assistant sub-

administrators, right down to a city hall charlady and an account-

ant's copyboy, all of whom, frankly, I paid a lot to obtain nothing

much. I had finally to sift through a mountain of information,

trying to distinguish what was important from what was insig-

nificant, what was simply too fantastic from what was just poss-

ibly so, racking my poor old brain to find, from fact to fact,

from obscurity to obscurity, a point of global articulation, an

organising factor, as you might say, that was always just slipping

out of my grasp.

"I did find things out, though, I gradually got to know what

it was all about, I got a hold of it at last. In a word, I hit

upon a solution and I now know all I want to know about my

upbringing, my past!

It is a story told by an idiot, Jull of sound and fury, signifying nothing.

* * *

2 2 5

"It's a long story, Amaury, an occasionally confusing, occasionally

trivial and occasionally almost magical story - of that "I for an

I", that's still, continuously, on my trail, on your trail. A story,

too, of that man who originally thought it up and who put it

into action all of 20 springs ago. That man who, right up to his

dying day, would spit on any bid for compassion, any call for

pity. That man who, again to his dying day, had but a solitary

goal: that of winning tit for tat, an I for an I, a tooth for a tooth,

vindicating his oath, satisfying his wrath - in Blood.

"And it was that man who would go out and kill off all our

sons in turn!"

"Him . . . Him . . . " a haggard Amaury was murmuring.

"That's right, old man. You stuck a photograph of him up on

your board but you had no information about him! That curious

individual with his bushy chin and his wispy hair! My papa! Your

papa!"

Amaury was sobbing now, clutching his stomach. "Oh, my

papa! I was totally ignorant of all this! Such a ghasdy man - and

I'm his son! You too! Why?"

"Calm down, Amaury, control your passions. You'll soon

know all about it."

Your papa, my papa (I don't know what to call him, or anyway

I don't know its pronunciation), was born in Ankara.

His was an aristocratic family, of a particularly high rank

locally, and colossally rich: it virtually had, so it was said, a Midas

touch. But a fair distribution of its capital was difficult, for, con-

sisting as it did of about 26 sons, cousins, aunts and so forth, all

of whom had in turn, ordinarily, 5 or 6 offspring, it could count

so many birthrights that it was thought, righdy, that its capital

would gradually diminish until it was totally worn away, notwith-

standing sporadic profits and windfalls.

Thus family tradition had it that almost all that capital should

go to its firstborn son, whilst his young siblings had to subsist

practically on scraps; thus that darling Firstborn would scoop it

2 2 6

all up, mansions, villas, lands, woods, stocks, bonds, diamonds

and gold ingots, and had no obligation to do any hard work,

whilst his family had to labour away from morning to

night.

Naturally, favouritism that flagrant, with a solitary son

vacuuming up all his family's adoration, risks having a backlash.

So, although our family sought to justify such discrimination as

a way of upholding and prolonging its authority (and a primary

mainstay of this authority was, as always, a substantial working

capital - capital, that is, that couldn't sustain too much dissi-

pation, in a cousin's dowry and so on), a custom was soon to

grow up taking as its basis, by a bias that almost wilfully sought

to instil guilt, not a Sint ut sunt nut non sint, but a soi-disant

moral right which, grading an individual according to his rank,

grants its firstborn all of its bounty, judging him good, virtuous,

candid and kind, whilst justifying giving nothing to any of his

siblings by painting portraits as foul as his was fair.

What was worst of all was that nobody was outwardly indig-

nant or cynical about such a family law; nobody would simply

say, Summum Jus, summa Injuria; nobody, firstborn or lastborn,

thought of such an unjust division of his patrimony as anything

but normal, anything but right; so nobody took a stand against

so obvious a misappropriation of funds, so flagrant a corruption

of authority.

In truth, as his only consolation in an unjust world, a victim

of this law had but a solitary fantasy - of his firstborn sibling

abruptly dying and his position passing to that son who had

priority.

So what you had, and almost continuously, was sons without

a sou, hard-up cousins and starving aunts uniting in imploration,

praying for a fatal blow. And, surprisingly, Allah in his com-

passion occasionally did grant such a wish: a typhoon blowing

up without warning, a spasmodic croup, would in fact kill him

off (although a basic contradiction would subsist, with a gap

narrowing bit by bit but not totally closing up).

2 2 7

At which point it was obvious that such a status quo, both

too soft and too hard, couldn't go on for long as it was.

In fact, you might say that, for its motto, our family would

gradually switch from that of Athos, Porthos, Aramis and

d'Artagnan, Un pour Tous, Tons pour Un, to an opportunistic I'm

All Right Jack (You Scratch My Back, I'll Scratch Tour Back) that

wasn't as sanguinary as you might think but that would last for

only about six months, and finally to Homo homini Lupus, which

was brought into play by such a dramatic stunt that all Ankara,

and in particular its local aristocracy, was full of admiration for it.

A youth of about 18 had in front of him six prior claimants,

a fact that, a priori, would disqualify him for good from arriving

at firstborn status. And if Maximin (our prolific assassin) actually

did attain such a status, it was by hatching, plotting, planning,

polishing and finally, triumphantly, carrying out six killings in a

row, six killings that in addition had nothing in common but a

sort of paradoxical imagination.

His first victim was Nicias, a dwarf, a runt, towards whom,

though a bit of a jackal, Maximin had no particular animosity.

Nicias wasn't too bright, though, and killing him, by comparison

with killing a jackal, was akin to taking candy from a baby.

Thus it was child's play for him to worm his way into Nicias's

villa by proposing to instruct him how to draw a bow-and-arrow

according to Buddhist philosophy. And whilst Nicias, who found

such a proposal mystifying if also gratifying, was struggling with

his books, Maximin, brandishing a pickax as hard as a rock and

as slim as a rollmop stick, struck him down with a mortal blow,

fracturing his ischium and provoking a constriction in his

inguinal ganglion, which brought on a suffocating contraction

and, almost instantly, a bout of dizzy fits that would soon turn

into a total blackout, a blackout that was to last for as long as

six days and that would at last kill him off in a local hospital,

much to his country's sorrow, with crowds of curious, gawping

Turks milling about in front of his hospital window, hoping to

2 2 8

catch sight of him spinning around, an unusual kind of funfair

attraction, you might think, but satisfying a local partiality to

physical monstrosity, particularly as Ispahan had its famous

"whirling" Fakir.

Optat's killing was just as tortuous.

Optat, a soft sort of individual, with a chronically pallid if not

downright pasty skin and such a sickly body that it invariably

had a contusion or a concussion or a dislocation, was fond only

of alcohol, drinking jars and jars of it all night long. So what

Maximin did was pay a postman to bring Optat a gigantic jug

of 100% proof alcohol and inform him that it was from Hainault,

as Optat had bought at Mons, by mail, a schnapps that aficion-

ados said was out of this world. Naturally thinking that this was

it, Optat would swallow a good third of his jug at a gulp, finding

it so tasty that within half-an-hour not a drop was still

undrunk.

But it had a fatal sting in its tail, so to say. In this jug Maximin

had put an inflammatory product, which, innocuous if soaking

in alcohol, would light up if brought into contact with air, so

producing Optat's carbonisation. Optat, who, by his total satu-

ration in alcohol, was a natural for such instant combustion,

burnt as quickly as touchwood, diffusing a curious but savoury

aroma of roast agouti all around him.

Maximin was passing by just at that instant  not, I should

say, haphazardly - and, grasping a lasso, caught Optat, a living

matchstick, a burning coal, a flaming twin of Joan of Arc, and

sought to drag him off to a public fountain not far away.

And what Maximin did at that point was compound his

iniquity by dunking his writhing rival as nonchalantly as you

might dunk a toasty hot croissant in a cup of cappuccino - an

iniquity, I might add, that was soon to profit his country (it's an

ill wind that blows nobody good), as it was found within a month

that an oddly acidic liquid, bubbling up from that fountain, had

a strong antidotal quality, particularly against catarrh, but of

2 2 9

application also to asthma, arthritis, bronchitis, gout, psoriasis,

muscular dystrophy, malaria, lockjaw, syphilis, constipation and

chilblains.

Following him was Parfait, with whom, though, Maximin saw

a major difficulty looming up. For this Parfait was as tall as

Goliath, as strong as a Turk and as malignant as a troll; was

brutal, cunning, rascally and corrupt; and, to cap it all, was simply

mad about fighting. If you hit him, Parfait hit you back, again

and again and again: it was as basic as that.

Now Parfait had, in a souk, a shop which sold all kinds of candy

 nougat, sugary almonds, lollipops, gumdrops, marshmallow,

marzipan and mints - and in particular a yoghurt in syrup that

Ankarans found so cooling on hot spring nights that it was

quickly known, by a natural association, as a "Parfait".

Thus no day would dawn in Ankara without a Timariot

or a Vizir or an Icoglan going to visit Parfait in his souk,

asking, no doubt for a gala that night, for a marasquino

"Parfait" or a blackcurrant "Parfait", two of his most scrumptious tidbits.

Thus, too, Maximin would call on Parfait in his turn, handing

him thirty sous and asking for a gigantic banana "Parfait".

"Parfait" said Parfait, a born francophiliac.

But as soon as Parfait brought his concoction to him, Maximin

took a spoonful, put on a wholly convincing show of throwing

up, and told him, without mincing his words, that it was simply

disgusting.

"What!" said Parfait, livid at such an affront, "You call my

Parfait . . . imparfait\!! ?"

Slap! Slap! Slap! Thus did Parfait attack Maximin and insist

on satisfying his honour.

"As you wish," said Maximin coolly. "I'm willing to confront

you in our family orchard tomorrow morning at dawn, but only

if what you and I fight with is of my choosing - and what I say

is not swords, not pistols, but soda siphons!"

2 3 0

For an instant Parfait was so put out by such a paradoxical

form of ammunition as to look almost punch-drunk.

And, catching him off-guard, smartly profiting from this dis-

array, Maximin took up a thick, knobby club and struck his rival

hard on his skull. Stumbling and groaning, Parfait was instantly

cut down.

What Maximin did now was coat his moribund body with his

own banana "Parfait", soaking it in syrup and adding, a blackly

humorous finishing touch, a jarful of gumdrops, sprinkling it

lavishly around his limbs.

At which point Maximin brought forth a dog that was champ-

ing at its bit, a gigantic, snarling Alsatian which for six months

had had, for its daily chow, nothing but Parfait's "Parfaits". Not

surprisingly, it sprang on Parfait's body, lapping it up and finally

gulping it down.

Walking away, Maximin said with a sly grin, "Poor Parfait has

just unwittingly thought up an original kind of candy: a Banana

Split!"

Chuckling at his own wit, Maximin had to turn to his fourth

victim, a claimant known as Quasimodo: a squat and dumpy guy,

a bit simian in his gait, a drooling, burbling moron with, in fact,

a strong hint of Victor Hugo's hunchback about him. Though

approaching thirty, his IQ was that of a infant.

His constant occupation (or, if you wish, vocation) was talking

to birds, holding forth, notably, to flocks of swallows, jays and

sparrowhawks that would swoop around a small boat-pond in

Ankara's public park foraging for crumbs - holding forth, I say,

rambling on for hours about nothing in particular, waving his

hands to and fro in a clumsy imitation of Saint Francis of Assisi.

Finding this all highly comical, an occasional individual out stroll-

ing would fling him a ducat or a florin, with which Quasimodo

would go off and buy food.

His killing was thus a cinch for Maximin, who on this occasion

was totally in control - sinking a narrow crossbar into Quasi-

2 3 1

modo's pond, wiring it up to an accumulator, so producing on

contact a strong flow of induction, and paying an urchin who

was passing by, as Quasimodo was holding forth, to hurl a phony

gold coin into it, a coin containing a tiny compass.

To cut a long story short, Quasimodo took a running jump

into his pond, falling an instant victim to hydrocution.

It was Romuald who would follow Quasimodo. But just as

Quasimodo was a snip, so Romuald was a tough nut to crack.

For, cunning, wary and inquisitorial, this Romuald saw plots and

plans constandy hatching around him and was suspicious of all

his family.

Almost afraid of his own shadow, Romuald would finally with-

draw into his villa for good, locking doors and windows, pacing

back and forth with a gun in his hand, squinting with paranoid

alarm at anybody chancing to pass by, starting up in fright if a

postman, say, should look in at his window and, cautious to a

fault, actually purchasing a hot air balloon, which would allow

him, at long last, to pass a night without worrying about

unknown assassins.

Maximin would first idly toy with a handful of solutions (caus-

ing Romuald's balloon to drift away out of sight by cutting

a cord that was anchoring it to his villa roof; obstructing its

auto-stabilisation pin or its gyroscopal joint; substituting for

argon a gas such as krypton, thus provoking a gigantic blast

inward or outward), but all in vain.

Finally, a lightbulb lit up in his brain. Hiring a small twin-prop

aircraft, Maximin took off, flying around Romuald's balloon and

abrupdy swooping down upon it, brushing against it by only a

yard or two, so producing a prodigious trough of air, suffocating

its occupant and causing his balloon to spin skywards out of

control.

Maximin's sixth and final victim was Sabin. But Sabin was a

man who wouldn't allow anybody to approach him, Sabin who,

2 3 2

having now just his aunt's husband in front of him as his family's

patriarch, was afraid that his soon having all its capital at his

disposal would risk provoking an attack on him from a rancor-

ously grudging sibling or cousin.

So this Sabin simply wouldn't admit into his stronghold, with-

out a pass (and occasionally two), a coalman, say, hauling in his

monthly supply of coal or a pastrycook's boy bringing him his

morning croissants.

A host of amusing rumours about him would buzz around

Ankara. It was said that his army of thirty spahis, all as handy

with yataghans as with swords or pistols, was paid a king's ransom

to accompany him about town and would instandy, unpityingly,

kill any man, woman or child coming within a yard of him. It

was said that Sabin had a flunky who was first to savour his food,

as any thought of poison put him in a funk. It was said, finally,

that among his staff was a young man of an amazing physical

similarity to Sabin who would withdraw to his couch at night

whilst Sabin would pass his nights in his attic  an attic, it was

also said, built by a craftsman (who was slain as soon as his job

was at its conclusion) to withstand any intrusion, thanks to a

combination lock on its thick iron door. In this attic, or so gossip

had it, was a six-month supply of food and drink.

Such a strong rival, a rival unwilling to omit anything in his

craving for total immunity from risk, was a stimulant for

Maximin, who hadn't found much to stump him in his undis-

criminatingly patchy job lot of killings up to that point. Born

victims, his antagonists, just a bunch of stillborn duds! But taking

on Sabin would finally justify his ambition, constituting its culmi-

nating point and putting his coruscating wits truly on trial.

It took him almost a month, though, to work out how to carry

it off. Not that his brain was at all short of inspiration, but his

rival's fortification struck him, at first sight, as wholly foolproof,

with not a rusty link in its chain.

Until that day on which Maximin was idly making small talk

to a local spiv who, in his own words, would "habitually supply

2 3 3

Sabin with an ass's foal, or should I say," this said with a salacious

wink, "a foal's ass, for, you know, sir, and don't say I told you,

it's only by balling a burro, and burrowing into its balls, that

poor Sabin has . . . got it up."

"Aha," said Maximin, smiling slyly, "opportunity knocks at

last. My sib has a major kink in his armour! I just know I can

turn this information to good account."

And, following it up, Maximin found out from an administra-

tor in Ankara's Municipal Zoo that, such was Sabin's voracity, a

foal wouldn't usually satisfy him. At most it brought him an

initial thrill; but, for his main dish, so to say, only a gigantic or,

if not, a totally unfamiliar animal would turn him on.

Which was why Sabin had a habit of bribing this administrator

to allow him to "borrow", for an occasional night of passion, an

animal of truly substantial width and girth, a big ruminant, say,

such as an ox or an orang-utan, a bison or a hippopotamus, or

an unusual animal, a kangaroo or a cassowary, a capon or a boa

constrictor, a platypus or a tapir, an opossum or an alligator, an

albatross or a caiman, a dolphin or an aardvark.

But such a Cook's (or cock's) tour of Ankara's animalia still

didn't satisfy Sabin, who, in sodomising so many curious animals,

was trying to match a particularly vivid carnal frisson, that which

his young loins had known, long ago, copulating with a lamantin

(Manatus inunguis or Ma.na.tus latirostris) from Chad.

Now, just at that instant, a carnival from Halifax would turn

up in Ankara, proposing to its townsfolk, among many similarly

oudandish attractions (a pair of twins with linking hips, a hybrid

hotchpotch of dwarfs, giants and albinos, a cow with a dachs-

hund's body and a rabbit with two tails), a soi-disant "Loch

Lomond Dragon" known as Rudolf. (In truth, it wasn't a dragon

at all nor an aquatic python, but a dugong, an animal as mild as

a lamb, that could, without risk of contradiction, pass for a laman-

tin, for it had, as do lamantins, a skin of shiny fur, an imposingly

stocky trunk and a cordial disposition.)

It's obvious, is it not, what was about to occur. Sabin would

2 3 4

start aching for Rudolf but, unwilling (and possibly also afraid)

to go and look at him, would try to pay his way to borrowing, for

a substantial sum, his darling dugong. Rudolf's groom, though,

would initially turn down his proposal, and it was only by doub-

ling, tripling and finally quintupling it that a cynical bargain was

struck. Sabin could hardly contain his joy.

Vigilant as always, Maximin found out about this and was

soon hatching a plan of his own, combining various sorts of

TNT, building what you might call a tiny suppositorial bomb,

managing, with typical aplomb, to worm his way into Rudolf's

aquarium and, profiting from its lazily dozing in its bath, ram-

ming in his fatal suppository and accompanying it with a fulmi-

cotton priming cap which, on contact, would spark it all off.

His plot striking him as virtually airtight, and having nothing

to do but hang around until nightfall, Maximin had a drink in a

squalid pub not far from Sabin's mansion, hoping to sing, within

four hours or so, a triumphant Hosanna.

Nor was our Maximin wrong. At 11.35 a young groom, that

with whom Sabin had struck his bargain, did in fact turn up,

drawing a bulky caravan in which, smiling as amiably as a cow

watching a train go past, Rudolf was snoozing.

At 11.52 Ankara was abruptly lit up with a blinding flash, with

a loud bang rattling its roofs and blowing out its windows,

and a smoky, stifling, malodorous fug drifting about until

morning.

And at 12.23, knowing now that his atrocity had no survivors,

a radiandy victorious Maximin would swan into a chic local night-

club, although normally tight with his cash (but such a trium-

phant coup did in his opinion warrant a blowout), and drink two

gigantic magnums of Cramant brut, jovially clinking his glass,

toasting his companions and standing drinks all night long.

So, against fantastic odds, Maximin had at last brought it off.

But alas, his Magnificat, his Hosanna, was sung too soon. Within

just six days a half-cousin of his, suspicious of his abrupt pro-

2 3 5

motion to firstborn status, would bump him off in his turn!

From that point on, killing was virtually a norm, killing turn and

turn about: if our family had a law ruling its conduct, it was

an uncompromising, proto-Darwinian law of survival. A young

accountant, who was handling its capital, soon lost his sanity

trying to control its multifarious ramifications. In just thirty-six

months, rights to that capital would fan out to as many as thirty-

two claimants, all of whom, without fail, would succumb to a

fratricidal blow.

It was finally obvious that, with mutual killings continuing in

such a ridiculous fashion, no family could last for long without

at last dying out. It was painfully obvious, too, that only a third

of our family at most was still intact. Panic stations! And, slowly,

an artificial kind of harmony was brought about, with siblings

and cousins and aunts all lining up to sign a pact  a shaky

coalition which, not surprisingly, would fall apart within a

month.

At which point, a law was laid down, imbuing this fratricidal

war with an almost ritual quality.

What this draconian law primarily did was disallow any man

from having two sons, so as to put no child at risk from his

bloodthirsty sib. It also sought to limit similar rivalry among

cousins, so that a day would dawn on which - by, as I say, a

Darwinian distribution, winnowing out all non-survivors at birth

- a solitary branch would grow from a strong family trunk.

To attain this ambitious goal, a trio of voluntary options was

put at our family's disposal:

a) that, on giving birth, a woman was automatically slain;

b) that, just as soon as his first son was born, a man automati-

cally had his balls cut off;

c) - and this option was most popular by far - that this man,

although raising his firstborn in normal conditions, would do

nothing to stop any following son from dying or would simply

2 3 6

do away with him - notably, by abandoning him on a dunghill,

drowning him in his bath or dishing him up for lunch to a British

Lord, according to Jonathan Swift's famous Proposition, as a

juicy joint of roast lamb or wild boar.

It was a law that would unblock an awkward situation and it

was to last for six springs, during which transmission of our

family's capital was not, thank God, an occasion for bloody

squabbling.

Nobody now would kill just for fun; no patriarch would allow

his branch to cast too long and dark a shadow across his rival's

branch; a quorum was brought to pass that all found fairly satis-

factory. And so this outwardly inhuman status quo wasn't actually

as harsh as all that.

2 3 7

23

In which an anxious sibling turns a hoard of cash found

in a drum to fairly satisfactory account

But (says Savorgnan, continuing) a horrifying bit of bad luck

was to occur to this unhappy family of ours.

Flying into Acapulco's Good Samaritan hospital, a malicious

stork brought our mama not just an infant but a trio of infants

in its bulging bill. Luckily (for, if not, it was curtains for both

of us), our papa who, according to that family law I told you

about, would normally watch his son's birth, had had, just that

morning, to go to Washington, for, as his work was importing

goods from abroad, a toy company in that city was proposing a

major contract involving his buying up, at a discount, a gigantic

stock of harmonicas that it was manufacturing and that his own

company could offload at a profit without any difficulty, particu-

larly in Ankara.

It was obvious to mama that, on signing his contract, papa

would instandy rush back down to Acapulco and, counting a trio

of sons, to two of which no man in his family had any right,

would do away with both of us.

In a spasm of instinctual passion, wishing to maintain our

survival at all costs, mama rang for a doctor and told him all

about our frightful situation. This doctor, a chivalrous and mag-

nanimous young man who was still in thrall to his Hippocratic

oath, couldn't turn his back on so poignant a supplication and,

laying our sibling in mama's loving arms, quickly took flight with

us to snatch us away from our doom.

2 3 8

"And so," says Amaury, "if I follow you aright, my papa found

just an only child on arriving back in Acapulco?"

"That's right. By falsifying our forms and giving us both an

alias - profiting from a lucky opportunity involving a pair of

stillborn twins occupying for an hour or so a corridor adjoining

our incubation ward - nobody had to inform him of his two

missing sons."

"But, if papa didn't know us, why harass us, why attack our

sons?"

"About thirty springs ago poor mama caught a cold that was

going around (staphylococcus viridans) and was visibly about to

succumb. A Cardinal, in hospital for a minor malady, would

grant absolution and unction but only following admission of all

worldly sins. From such a man of God, such an august pastor,

mama could hold nothing back.

"Now this pompous Cardinal, who was a bit of a crook, practis-

ing simony, trafficking in dubious shards from Christ's Cross or

nails from his crucifixion, misappropriating church funds and

blackmailing its faithful, would instandy think of mama's infor-

mation as a kind of jackpot and start angling for bids. A distant

cousin of ours, a cousin who, as it turns out, was acting for our

family's Dauphin, got to know of this situation, accusing papa

of going back on his family's law by hiding us from its quorum

and, to punish him, killing his son, your sib, my sib!

"Alas, fanatically fond of this son, hoping to appoint him Dau-

phin and accusing us of conniving at his downfall (for, without

us, in his opinion, nobody had any motivation for doing away

with him), papa took his killing so badly that his family thought

his mind was starting to crack up.

"Papa took an oath to kill us, to track us down until our dying

day, and, first, to kill our sons - so that you and I would know

in our turn how tragic it was for a man not to bask in filial

adoration!"

"So papa did know us  did know our sons?"

"No. At first papa didn't know anything of us (in addition,

2 3 9

you had no son, nor had I), but took off, notwithstanding, with

a solitary goal: to pick up our trail, to find out who had brought

us up, and in what country you and I had grown up."

His first port of call was Acapulco, from which city, tracking us

with a flair as cunning as that of a Huron or a Sioux, papa would

laboriously follow, all of 20 springs on, in our path.

From Acapulco, now, to Guadalajara, a populous town in

which I was taught my ABC and had my first communion along

with you. But that young doctor, our saviour, was soon on to

him, knowing, or probably just anticipating, his plan to follow

us. So, on our 10th birthday, you and I hastily quit Guadalajara

for Tiflis, Tiflis for Tobolsk, Tobolsk, finally, for Oslo. And it

was in Oslo that our doctor would pass away without first

informing us about that dark shadow that was cast across our

path.

Now, at that point, I was split up from you. A circuitous path

took you to a sanatorium in Uskub, from which you almost

instandy ran away; but, run down by a truck whilst darting in

and out of traffic on a busy highway, you totally forgot your

past.

For my part, I got to Hull, a British port in which I was

brought up by a drum-major, who, noting that I had a natural

gift for studying and a passion for books, paid for my tuition at

Oxford.

So it was that I lost contact with you. You didn't know any-

thing about my way of living, including my alias; nor did I know

anything about yours. But I did on occasion worry about you,

thinking with nostalgia of our common past.

And, as soon as I was 25, and had my MA, I took a post as

assistant in a Council for Propagating Low Latin, an organisation

that had its HQ in Sofia. As I had only six hours of tuition a

month, I had at my disposal a lot of days in which to find out

what I could about you, profiting from this handy fact - that,

by train, it was at most a day's outing from Sofia to Uskub.

2 4 0

In its sanatorium, though, nobody had any information about

you. So I would go around Bulgaria, asking about you and carry-

ing in my bag a charcoal drawing that I'd got a local artist, a

skilful draughtsman if hardly a Goya, to do, following indications

from a sanatorium doctor  a striking mug-shot it was too,

though probably invalid, as it was so long ago that you'd run

away.

Showing this drawing to anybody who was willing to look at

it, to a farmhand, a sandwich boy, a fairground pitchman, a

compositor, an accountant and a cop, I occasionally had a hunch

of a forthcoming tip-off. But no, it was all to no avail.

Finally giving up my post as assistant, I quit Uskub without

having had an inkling of information about you, without having

had a hint of any kind.

But, moving at that point to Augsburg, a city in which I was

paid a fabulous commission by its local Josiah Macy Jr. Founda-

tion for my collaboration on Oskar Scharf-Hainisch von

Schlussnig-Figl's study of Bororo's total lack of guttural sounds

in its pronunciation - Bororo, a particularly rich and stimulating

Paranan patois in which, as in Bantu, most nouns finish in a

labial "//" - I would go to Uskub on a trio of occasions, from 6

March to 20 April, from 28 July to 1 August, and again in

mid-August, to carry on untiringly with my inquiry.

I had, at last, to draw this conclusion: I was 10, you too,

naturally, at our splitting up. Now, if I was taking pains to find

you again, I'd had no hint of you, for your part, trying to pick

up my trail. So what could justify such a disturbing fact? I had

to admit your vanishing act or, should I say, by postulating it

a priori, to work out a motivation for it: (a) your dying as soon

as you ran away from your sanatorium; (b) a gypsy carrying you

off; (c) a brutal shock, an unknown trauma, fatally impairing

your sanity or your instinct or your wisdom, cutting you off from

all contact with a world of hard facts and truths!

Working my way through a mountain of inscriptions, imma-

triculation forms, almanacs, journals, logbooks and notarial

2 4 1

scripts, going from administration to administration, visiting

stations and dockyards, harbours and airports, hospitals and

shops, I took thirty-six months all told to find out that, 18 springs

ago, a handful of local inhabitants had caught sight of a boy, a

youthful vagabond with a moronic look about him, roaming

through Mitrovitsa, a big industrial town not far from Uskub.

This youth didn't know any Bulgarian, had blood on his moc-

casins and was visibly starving.

I was instantly conscious, by both intuition and a kind of

irrational conviction, that this was my first truly significant tip.

I took a train to Mitrovitsa and a local man soon got in touch,

corroborating my story and smiling fondly at my drawing. Long,

long ago, taking pity on him, this man had found just such a lad,

making him his goatboy, giving him a roof, a room and food.

So, having had six springs of worrying about you in vain, of

not knowing who to turn to for information, I was at last starting

to track you down!

I found out, as I said, that a truck had run into you during

your flight from Uskub, its impact causing a concussion that was

so total, so profound, that nobody had any notion what to call

you or what your background was and so on.

But I was told by this man who took you in that you soon

struck him as, basically, a bright young lad, not at all as stupid

as you had at first. You gradually got to know how to talk again,

and would display a gift: for counting. Supplying you with an

adas, an assistant at a local school had a long talk with my man

and got his grudging approval to prolong your tuition as far as

it could possibly go.

In all you would pass thirty-six months in Mitrovitsa.

Occasionally a bunch of snotty kids would attack you and spit

on you and shout out, "Anonumos! Anonumos!", a callous, cut-

ting word that was your local patois, naturally, for "anonymous".

And, I was told, it was finally so familiar a catcall around town

that it almost stuck to you for good. By quitting Mitrovitsa,

though, you at last saw an opportunity of burning your boats,

2 4 2

throwing off your past and starting out again as "Amaury Con-

son", an alias you took from that assistant who taught you all

you know.

I was hoping to contact this original Amaury Conson. But on

my arrival in Mitrovitsa I couldn't find him at all. A cousin of

his, with whom I had a long chat, thought Conson was possibly

living in Zurich. And in six months I too was in Zurich, profiting

from a symposium in which I was giving a talk. I finally got in

touch with your tutor, who had no information about your situ-

ation but did pass on a crucial fact: that a man with a bushy chin

- outwardly, just a typically shabby old crackpot living from hand

to mouth but, inwardly, boiling with fury - was also asking about

you!

This, I thought, was curious. Who, apart from yours truly,

would want to contact you? And why?

Now, at that point, fairly constantly, I had an intuition of bad

luck pursuing both of us. In fact, waking up at night with a start,

I found I had, again and again, pavor nocturnis, a vision of a

killing.

It brought to my mind a day - but which day? - in our child-

hood, a day on which, whilst I was idly playing with a yo-yo and

you with a spinning top, our doctor saviour had sat us both on

his lap and told us, softly, almost inaudibly, that in a distant land

a man was looking for us, a man who had it in for us and would

probably try to harm us and that, on that far-off day on which

our own sons would start growing up, and run a similar risk,

you and I must vigilandy stand guard against him.

But this flashback, if I may call it that, was so hazy and confus-

ing that I took about six days to work out just what it was trying

to signal from my unconscious.

And, abruptly, Acapulco was to pop into my mind - Acapulco,

that city in which I was born. I rang its municipal hospital and

found out about our birth, about how a young doctor had

thought to switch us about with a pair of stillborn twins, about

his adoption of us and our flight. And, chillingly, I also found

2 4 3

out that, oh, long, long ago, a man with a bushy chin had burst

into our hospital rambling away about his poor lost son and

shouting, "An I for an I, a truth for a truth!"

So, starting out with hardly a crumb of information, this man

had by now got to know virtually all about us, had found out

your alias and had actually got in touch with your homonym,

that first Amaury Conson. It was a long haul, but today our

arch-antagonist was swooping down upon us, was hot on our

trail!

I was struck again by his untiring obstinacy, grasping instandy

that this was a pursuit that would last right up to our dying day,

that its instigator wouldn't think for an instant of pausing, that

such a fanatic had but a solitary ambition driving him forward:

that of having us at last within his grasp, of watching our sons

writhing in agony, watching us writhing in agony!

I thought it vital that you in your turn should know of this

man in whom such wrath was stoking up such fanaticism and

who would go all out to find us. But I didn't know in what

country to start looking for you. Or in what city. In a colonial

bungalow? In Chicago, in a mansion by Frank Lloyd Wright, say,

or an airy, glass, skyscraping condominium by Philip Johnson? In

a Saint-Flour slum? In a villa with a balcony full of aspidistras in

a provincial, almost pastoral suburb of Hamburg or Upsala? Did

you know what risk you ran? And, most importantly, had you a

son? All such points I quickly had to clarify.

Naturally, I had a possibility of communicating with you by

radio or in a want ad. I did occasionally think of doing so, and

I almost got round to it, finally changing my mind, though, as

I was afraid that an unambiguous signal of that sort would also

assist our Bushy Man.

Whilst, for his part, Amaury Conson, your tutor, was trying

to obtain information as to your lot, my own papa, that charming

British drum-major, sinking fast, and having no natural kin, had

his solicitor add a codicil to his will according his only (if unnatu-

ral) son a gift of thirty diamonds, all of amazing proportion and

2 4 4

purity, and including a particular rock that was practically worthy

of a Koh-i-Noor or that Grand-Mogol for which Onassis was

willing to fork out a cool million.

Having thus no financial worry of any kind, I quit my job to

work only for you.

And, dying to know (if I may put it thus) from what was

born that damnation pursuing us, my first act was to fly out to

Ankara, in which city, I was told, our man was born.

So I alit at Ankara. But, at its airport, a customs and immi-

gration official, who visibly had a high opinion of his own

position, instantly sprang up, yapping, "I want to look at

your arm!"

Though put out by such an offhand approach, I duly took off

my parka. Adjusting his lorgnon, grasping my right arm, studying

my wrist and giving out a loud cry of satisfaction, this official at

last said that I should follow him into an adjoining room, a small

back room in which sat a civil-looking chap who, though sporting

not a uniform but an ordinary casual suit, was obviously his boss,

for my man saw fit to bow to him and practically curtsy.

"What is it?" his boss said to him in a forthright way.

"Sahib," said my man (who couldn't know that, au fait with

almost thirty subdivisions of Ponant patois, I had no particular

difficulty with Turkish), "it's an individual from that . . . that

Family, with . . . with that mark . . . you know what I'm talking

about . . . on his right wrist. As soon as I saw him, I thought

I'd find it - and I did. It was just a hunch, but, as you know,

Sahib, my flair for this sort of thing is unfailing!"

It was a fact. I had, and had always had, on my right wrist, a

livid, narrow furrow, forming a sort of parabola (just as did that

Zahir that had so forcibly struck Augustus or that curious whitish

scar that Albin would tattoo on all his gang of rascals and lascars)

- a parabola that was, you might say, ajar, not joining up in any

normal fashion but finishing with a straight inward dash. But,

until that instant, I hadn't known that it was a family trait.

"You don't say?" said his boss. "I want to look at it."

2 4 5

His assistant, his "Chaouch", as Turks say, took my arm to

show to his boss, who said to him, a bit grudgingly, I thought,

"Insh}Allah, it is in truth what you said it was, Mahmoud Abd-ul-Aziz Ibn Osman Ibn Mustapha, and for this I'm going to put

you up for promotion. But," now dismissing him with a nod,

"not a word of it to anybody, or it'll all go wrong."

"Barakalla Oufik," was all that, on his way out, Mahmoud

Abd-ul-Aziz Ibn Osman Ibn Mustapha said.

At that point his boss, not saying anything but pointing to a

chair, on which I sat down, and lighting up a hookah that had

a sharp, sultry aroma of Turkish tobacco, rang for a boy, com-

manding him to bring a jug of kawa au jasmin, a lurid Tahitian

concoction which all Turks of distinction drink in gallons.

"You know Italian?"

"Jawohl," I said.

So, talking in Italian or, should I say, "spiking da Italianisch",

this chap said that Ankara had had, that autumn, as many as

thirty victims of coronary thrombosis. And, as my vaccination

had long ago run out, I could not lawfully stay in his city.

This, I was conscious, was a totally phony claim, that wouldn't

stand an instant's scrutiny in a court of law, but I was also con-

scious that, if such intimidation didn't work on its own, my man

wouldn't stop at physical obstruction.

It was obvious that his instruction was to stop any individual

with such a furrow on his wrist, any individual of "that . . .

Family", as his assistant, Mahmoud Abd-ul-Aziz, had curdy put

it, from coming into Ankara. But what I didn't know, and had

to find out, was what was prompting so unusual a form of dis-

crimination. Why was Ankara so afraid of my arrival, of that of

anybody of my "Family"?

Not daring to ask point-blank about that taboo that was cling-

ing to my family, I took him in with a cunning trick.

Acting as panicky as though I truly thought I was running a

mortal risk by coming to Ankara, I quickly got up, took off in

my Lagonda-Bugatti and, driving to a small town not too far

2 4 6

away, took a room in a B-and-B in which I was to stay put for

about six days.

In that room I brought about an amazing physical transforma-

tion, staining my body a swarthy walnut colour, wrinkling my

brow with a stick of charcoal, disguising my blond hair with a

long black wig and putting on a brown burnous. And, casually

mingling with a group of actors arriving in Ankara for a gala to

launch its Municipal Casino, I got my visa, and an all-important

pass, without any difficulty, finally making my way into town.

From a chum in London I had a card of introduction to a

Turkish solicitor. So, continuing to sport my wig and adding a

donnish-looking lorgnon, I took off my burnous and put on

a chic Cardin suit.

In addition, afraid of an official coming up at random to study

my wrist, I stuck a conspicuous Band-Aid on it and almost

thought to put my arm in a sling as though I'd had a boil or a

bad wasp sting and was just out of hospital.

I paid a visit to this solicitor that my chum had known at

Oxford. Not daring to blurt out all my suspicions straightaway

to a man with looks as sly and crafty as his, and so practically

ad-libbing, I told him a long story about my passion for folk art

and music and my coming to Ankara to draw up a vast Variorum

of sayings, myths, sagas, amusing facts, songs and traditions.

Luckily, I'd hit upon his own particular hobby, for, grinning

as broadly if I was actually tickling him, my man was to hold

nothing back.

"Now . . . What should I start with? Do you know Ali Baba

and his Tradition?"

"Uh, no . . . I'm afraid not."

"Oh, but you should. It's simply charming:

To a tinny ocarina playing a potpourri by Paganini, Ali

Baba, tiny Pacha but as stocky as a buffalo, as a big fat tub

of lard, now starts guzzling macaroni sizzling in a frying

pan, guzzling pasta with a musty, fusty, rusty, dusty savour

2 4 7

to its flavour. Lying down on his divan, a cat starts licking

its own down. Ali Bab a burps and gulps down a joint. Good,

says Ali, now I must go. Taking his gun, his arrows, his

bazooka, his drum, mounting a darling stallion, Ali gallops

through pampas, woods, mountains and canyons and, without

knowing why, starts chasing a lion that was no doubt grazing

on fruit and thinking it could lift up a rock and find allu-

vium. Ali Baba shouts: Oh, what good is it all? Did Ali know

what it was all about, this thing, this thingamajig? For that

you would want addition, subtraction, multiplication and

division. Adding 3 to 5 is 8; adding 6 to 1 is 8 minus 1.

What? says this moron, a calculation? It kills Ali Baba; as

for our lion, it runs away so fast, so fatally fast, it croaks.

I said "Bis! Bis!" with as much animation as I could summon,

causing him to bow and blush with obvious gratification. And I

finally got down to brass tacks, hinting that in all this information

at his disposal I'd no doubt find a handful of spicy notations on

which I might draw for my work.

But, as soon as I'd said that, I saw him growing ominously

broody, his brow furrowing. I was conscious of making a faux

pas.

"In Ankara I know of a solitary spicy notation, as you would

put it. But, and I'm not kidding, it's a thing that nobody's willing

to talk about. I know of many a local guy with a big mouth who

had no opportunity to finish his -"

And I didn't doubt that his claim had a grain of truth in it,

for just at that point I saw an octagonal gash abruptly bloodying

his brow and I saw him, almost instantly, slumping forward from

its impact. It was a gunshot wound of pinpoint accuracy such as

only a first-class marksman could pull off - a marksman who,

firing from a balcony not far away, no doubt guiding his aim

with a microvisual gunsight and smashing a fanlight window,

had got him with his first shot.

"Good God!" I said inwardly, clutching at my mouth in horror.

2 4 8

I'd had a ghasdy fright and was afraid to so much as touch

him. And, in a flash, a brick was thrown in, a brick to which was

stuck by a Band-Aid a stiff card on which I found this communi-

cation:

IF YOU KNOW WHAT'S GOOD FOR YOU, PAL,

D O N T STICK YOUR SNOUT IN OUR AFFAIRS!

Illustrating, or possibly signing, this ominous warning was a

purplish stamp portraying an individual in a hood as arrogant

and apocalyptic as a Ku-Klux-Klansman, an individual holding

aloft a flag with a trio of flapping tails.

I initially thought that it was just a bit of bad luck on my part,

that my informant was possibly part of a gang running guns or

smuggling drugs and that this gang, thinking him about to spill

it all out for hard cash, had shut him up by simply putting him

out of commission, whilst handily intimidating his "confidant"

- which is to say, yours truly - into giving up his mission.

But, studying his carcass, I saw that it too, on its right wrist,

had that unpropitious sign singling out an individual as part of

our Family. I'd unwittingly sought out a rival for my advisor!

I simply didn't what to do at that point, conscious as I was,

without a shadow of a doubt, that I was running a risk just by

staying in Ankara. But what I still hadn't found out was why?

why? why?

What finally cast an illuminating ray of light on it all was,

as almost always occurs, a miraculous combination of luck and

confusion.

I was holing up in a room not far from Ankara's piano souk

(it isn't commonly known that, globally, Ankara holds first pos-

ition, in front of Osaka, in front of La Paz, in importing old

pianos), a room I was hoping would function as a good port in

a storm. And in that room I'd lurk and languish, constandy afraid

of an assassin bursting in.

On my first night in it I was struck by a loud din rising up

2 4 9

from an adjoining courtyard. Without at all panicking, I quickly

ran out on to my balcony.

In that courtyard, huddling in a kind of plaza in front of

Ankara's imposing Inns of Court, a building wholly without

proportion, a vast, amorphous, granitic block, with walls of a

particularly gaudy purplish colour, stood an incongruous group

of musicians. I call it incongruous as what I saw was a trio of

banjos, a cor anglais, a cithara, a bassoon, a bass drum and,

capping it all, a soprano singing, in a monotonously droning

fashion, as if in a clumsy imitation of plainsong, a fantastic, florid

oratorio about a Blank King and his vanishing act - a King who,

though in Abraham's bosom, would wolf down, in turn, 25 of

his own vassals.

Wildly applauding, I cast a handful of kurus from my balcony,

as I found this curious song most amusing, admiring it particu-

larly for its humour, which was both sardonic and cryptic, both

sly and difficult to grasp, admiring, too, its vividly Turkish qual-

ity, symbolising as it did a vital point of articulation for my

assimilation of that country's racial and national unconscious.

At midnight, hungry, I thought to call out to Ali, a barman

from a local snack bar, asking him to bring up to my room a tray

of mutton pilaf, couscous and fruit.

Ali brought it up and I got to chatting with him for an instant,

casually, about this and that, as you do in such a situation, and

finally about that curious musical group, Ali asking what I'd

thought of it and my giving him my opinion, a high opinion, of

its gifts, adding, "I was particularly struck by that song about a

Blank King, by its humour and its imagination."

"Its imagination, you say!" said Ali indignantly. "Huh! It hasn't

got a grain, an atom, an iota of imagination! It's all factual,

it's all God's truth! I, Ali, know all about this Family, all of

us in Ankara do, a family that has as its main physical trait a

narrow, livid furrow on its right wrist. I also know that, on

top of its pyramid, so to say, is a king with a right to all its

capital. . ."

2 5 0

Whilst Ali was rambling on in this fashion, my hand was clasp-

ing a poniard I had thought to tuck into a mackintosh that I'd

just put on, mumbling about how frightfully cold it was on my

balcony. For it was obvious that this was a provocation on his

part, a provocation that was bound to finish with my dying at

his hands.

In fact, I was wrong. Ali - rara avis - was totally impartial in

this affair, candidly spilling it all out from A to Z, though not

without lots of omissions, providing a succinct history of that

wrath, and its origin, that, hounding our family, was playing

havoc with my way of living - with yours, too, and that of all

of us!

Putting scant trust in his capacity not to blab about it again,

not to shoot off his mouth about this chat I was having with

him now, which would, I didn't doubt, bring about my own

instant liquidation, I had to do away with poor Ali, first allowing

him, though, to say all that was on his mind.

Thus, having found out what I had to find out, and knowing

what I was in for if I was to stay on, I quit Ankara, cursing it

for always.

Within four days I was in Zurich. I took a taxi to Amaury

Conson's flat, dying to fill him in on all I'd found out in Ankara,

hoping, too, to know of his own inquiry into your situation.

But Amaury was kaput - shot at point-blank, again and again,

whilst busy at his Aga making his morning cocoa.

His pyjamas had drunk up all his blood, and his iris had a

twisting, curling spiral of crimson running through it that

brought to mind nothing so much as a taw of that garish kind

that boys roll back and forth in school playgrounds during lunch

hour.

Thus I'd got to know all about that which was pursuing

us, but I still didn't know in which country I might find

you.

And, from that point on, I paid visits to city upon city, Ajaccio,

Matifou, Pontchartrain, Joigny, Stockholm, Tunis, Casablanca,

2 5 1

consulting thick parish rolls without picking up your tracks,

haunting town halls and commissariats without coming away

with a modicum of information from anybody . . .

2 5 2

21

Which, starting with a downcast husband, will finish

with a furious sibling

For six months my only goal was to find you - until, downcast,

worn out, I had to abandon it all.

And a glorious day would dawn on which, whilst cruising

aboard SS Captain Crubovin, a ship sailing from Toulon bound

for La Guaira (Caracas's port), I ran into Yolanda, its chaplain's

typist and all-round Girl Friday.

It was what you might call lust at first sight - a lust that nothing

but our instandy uniting in holy matrimony could satisfy.

Wishing to go on a world tour, I bought an ultrasonic aircraft

- and a day would dawn, too, during a flight across Africa, our

civil nuptials just 12 months old and Yolanda coyly announcing

a coming birth and in fact visibly filling out, a day on which, by

dint of an abrupt drop in its supply of gas, I had to bring my

craft down damn quickly. Not without difficulty I brought about

a bumpy but triumphant landing on a particularly grim spot in

Morocco, a sandy, Saharan hillock hardly as big as an old maid's

cotton hanky, with a crash, though, which split my right wing

in two.

Our stock of foodstuffs would hold out for a month, but it

took us an arduous and scorching four days' walk finally to find

our way to a tiny oasis at which local bands of nomads would

occasionally stock up on liquid, turn and turn about, according

to which month it was.

For our first six days I couldn't complain about our condition:

in truth, it wasn't all that bad. I had a go at hunting a dahu, an

2 5 3

amusing animal similar to a fawn but which, living on mountain

foothills, had such a clumsy, squinting kind of body that, to catch

it, what you had to do was approach it on all fours and mimic a

goura's irritating chirp - a goura is a songbird that dahus simply

cannot stand. Furious, caught short and, most importandy, with

its guard down, our incautious dahu would try an abrupt U-turn

and, wobbling, fall into a gully or a wadi, from which it wasn't

difficult to pull it out. Yolanda would roast it on a spit and I'd

tuck into it, finding it as scrumptious as I was now starting to

find salt pork, our usual sort of food, monotonous.

Finally, thirst had us by our throats. Our oasis was almost dry

and my aquavit would burn us without slaking our thirst.

This was my conclusion: that Yolanda and I had to light out

again, on foot, moving only at nightfall, filling up our flasks at

any oasis on our way, crossing Hoggar, surmounting arid tracts

of sand and glacial mountains and, by going southwards, arriving

at In Salah, Tindouf or Timbuctu, or, if striking out northwards,

arriving at Igli, A'in-Chai'r, Ai'n-Taiba with its fort, Ai'n-Aiachi

with its oasis, Mac-Mahon with its garrison or Arouan with its

Casbah.

But, at Hamada as at Tassili, at Adrar as at Iguidi, at Grand

Adas as at Borku, and at Djouf as at Touat, that inhuman Sahara

brought so many hardships to any foolhardy individual daring

to cross it on foot that I had difficulty making ground, particularly

as poor Yolanda was visibly about to go into labour.

Finally, with Yolanda's sobbing supplications ringing in my

brain, I had to abandon my darling to God and His compassion,

striking out on my own, walking, jogging, almost running, clasp-

ing in my hand a compass with which I could quantify my pos-

ition vis-a-vis Orion and Sirius, scrutinising my illimitably

distant, illimitably sandy, illimitably starry horizon, following a

caravan's worn-out tracks as far as it would go but also, occasion-

ally, doubling back on my own trail, and constandy hoping, and

in truth praying, that Lady Luck was in my camp.

And, I must say, it paid off, for within four days of my

2 5 4

starting out I saw a goum, an Arab military unit, on patrol.

Alas! How could I know that just as its commandant was

cooling my burning throat with drops from his hip flask, an act

that brought to mind Victor Hugo's famous hussar who

Parcourait a dada an soir d'un grand combat

Un champ puant la Mort sur qui tombait la Nuit

(His combat won, on foaming colt would cross

That carcass-stinking camp on which Night falls),

a hussar who brought comfort to a straggling Hidalgo by giving

him a drop of rum and whom Hugo was fond of praising not

just for his imposing bulk but also for his unfailing sang-froid -

how could I know that, just at that instant, Yolanda was fading

fast!

For, slaking my thirst, gulping down a mouthful of hot food,

changing into dry clothing and strapping on my back an appar-

atus, minimal but functional, for honing my aircraft's cycloid (or

cyclospiral) rotor fan, that which controls its admission circuit

(what such a job actually calls for is a pruning hook or a gauging

awl; but, making up for that, I had, for tools, a drill, a mattock,

a picklock, a dipstick, a hacksaw, an adz and a nail-chuck that,

to my dismay, had a tap with a missing partition, though its

knob, thank God, was still intact), I got back to my aircraft to

confront this harrowing sight: having just had six - six! - infants

in a row, Yolanda lay dying.

Roaring in pain, I ran forward, giving my darling an invigorat-

ing drink from my flask. But, alas, with a last mournful cry,

Yolanda sank away in my arms.

Oh, what words can I possibly find to portray my profound

sorrow at Yolanda's passing away? How, to this day, can I talk

calmly of my affliction? My sorry condition? Again and again I

thought that I too would succumb, sacrificing our offspring, put-

ting a pistol to my mouth and firing it, so painful was this loss.

Pitiful survivor as I was of a gloriously happy union, laid low,

2 5 5

cast down, my spirits in constant mourning, carrying my cross,

mounting, oh, fifty Golgothas, all I sought, hoping for nothing

now in this world, was to join Yolanda as quickly as I could.

And I would longingly toy with my hacksaw, for such a sharp

tool could cut through my skin with as scant difficulty as a fork

prodding a soft runny gorgonzola and so accord that instant

mortality that I was looking for!

But I thought of our six offspring, not any of whom I was

blaming for my loss (how could I?), six squalling infants still

squirming in bloody umbilical cords and probably running a risk

of strangulation or asphyxiation.

I took pity on what was now my family. Infant by infant, I

cut off that cord uniting my brood to a now arid womb that had

brought it forth; and I did what I could to wash it, making all

six snug and warm in my aircraft.

Now I had to fix its admission circuit, an arduous, frustrating

job, for, try as I might, it would always light up too soon, without

waiting for any propulsion of gas in its induction piping. Nor

would honing its pivot joint do it on its own. I had to adjust it

all, point by point, joystick and bolts, piping and pads, stuffing-

box and pistons.

It took four days working on it nonstop till I got it functional

again. And, taking off, I struck out for Agadir, hoping finally, in

civilisation, to grant my brood that constant monitoring of which

it was now so badly in want.

Whilst flying, though, what should pop into my mind but that

warning that you and I had had in our childhood from our doctor

saviour. And I thought about it, I thought about it long and

hard, during my flight, arriving at last at this conclusion: if our

family had drawn up so many codicils vis-a-vis its patrimony and

its distribution, it was that it had a tradition of giving birth to

too many offspring, a history of bi-, tri- or on occasion quadri-

parturitions.

Thus that man who was pursuing us, who was trying to kill

us, that man, our own papa, who had sworn to satisfy his thirst

2 5 6

for our blood by first doing away with our sons, was no doubt

particularly on watch for any hospital announcing a birth of an

abnormal amount of infants.

If I took my six offspring to a clinic in Agadir, I could hardly

stop it from making such a miraculous fact public. Nor could I

stop my infanticidal antagonist from grasping his opportunity at

last!

I was conscious, in fact, that what I couldn't do on any account

was insist on raising my brood as a family. My only way of

assuring that it wouldn't fall victim to this madman, this fanatic,

was, cuckoo-fashion, to put my sons, all my sons, up for

adoption . . .

"I'm with you now," murmurs Amaury, blanching, "I know

how it's all coming out. Taking 'Tryphiodorus' as an alias, you

put on a grubby smock, of a sort that a tramp might sport, and

you had Augustus adopt Haig, Vowl adopt Anton . . ."

"That's right. But you still don't know it all. For think of this:

Hassan Ibn Abbou was also my son, whom I had to abandon

as soon as I got to Agadir.

Parking my aircraft in a vacant hangar, and wishing to guard

my offspring from any risk of association with our family, what

I did first was to scratch off, with a crypto-coagulating nib, that

tiny but singular wrist mark that, for any child, was damning

proof of his background.

And, picking a baby out at random, according to an old song

I'd known in my own childhood:

1 Potato, 2 Potato

3 Potato, 4

5 Potato, 6 Potato, and so on,

I took it to a hospital in Agadir. It was night. Groping along

corridors by just as much light as a match would afford, I finally

caught sight of a woman who had just had a stillborn child and

who, visibly, was also not long for this world. It was an opportu-

nity I couldn't miss. I insist that this poor woman was dying -

2 5 7

by finding a wad of cottonwool on a tray and soaking it in

chloroform, I simply brought it all forward by a day or so. Placing

this woman's baby in an adjoining cot, I had my own stand in

for it.

At that point, scrawling what I thought was a suitably Arabic-

sounding alias, Ibn Abbou (an alias which from that day forward

would cling to my son), on a plastic tag and attaching it to his

wrist, I took flight from Morocco, my goal that of finding vacant

lots, if I may put it that way, for all of my offspring. You know

now that Douglas was put into Augustus's hands at Arras; and

that in Dublin, as Tryphiodorus, I thought to farm Anton out

to Lady d'Antrim, who had as husband Lord Horatio Vowl, an

Irish tobacco baron.

This Lord Vowl was famous for making for Dunhill, incorpor-

ating Latakia and Virginia tobacco in a combination known only

to him, for it got its miraculously insinuating flavour not from

its individual parts but from his cunning proportioning of such

parts - was famous, I say, for making Balkan Sobrani, a brand

familiar to all tobacco aficionados and which Davidoff would call

a classic.

Alas! Within just thirty-six months, Lord Horatio, mounting

a foal that was probably a bit too frisky for a man of his bulk,

had a bad fall, so bad a fall, in fact, that it would instandy knock

him out and put him in a fatal coma. With his last, dying gasp,

Vowl was said to murmur to his assistant a formula, a formula

as famous and also as unknown as Coca-Gala's, for manufacturing

his tobacco, but its list of instructions would turn out so hard to

follow that nobody, posthumously, so to say, has found a way

of producing a tobacco with all its original purity and subtility

of aroma. Which is why, nowadays, you'll find no such thing as

good Balkan Sobrani; and which is also why a low-quality brand

is now sold by tobacconists as a poor imitation, Squadron Four,

which, combining a fairly uninspiring if not totally banal kind of

Latakia with an insipid Virginia, a Virginia that's obviously not

2 5 8

a product of sunny Arlington, Fairfax, Richmond, Portsmouth,

Chatham, Norfolk or any truly Virginian plantation, has a flavour

that, candidly, you could only call so-so.

But if, thus, you know how I put half of my offspring out to

adoption, you know nothing, if I'm not wrong, of my surviving

trio.

First, I should say that it was my aim to bring up two out of

six on my own. So, having a last infant to part with - it wasn't

a boy but a girl, my only girl - I took a train for Davos . . .

"Davos?" said Amaury with curiosity.

"That's right. And you'll find out in your turn how I found

out why any notion of salvation on my part was simply wishful

thinking, why our family's Damnation was going to track us

down till our dying day. For  oh, it was just damn bad luck! 

in Davos, to part with that last child, I took it in my mind to go

to a sanatorium."

"A sanatorium!" said Amaury, almost in a cry.

"Uh huh. A sanatorium," I said, in a singsong as mournful as

an air-raid alarm, as a ship's foghorn in a storm, "right again, a

sanatorium. I got into it, as was my wont, by night, walking at

random along ill-lit corridors and at last, through a small, oblong

window, spotting a dark cot in which was lying -"

Amaury dramatically cut in. "Anastasia!"

"Yup, Anastasia, Hollywood's most luminous, most numinous

star. I saw, at my approach, that Anastasia, who now lay dying

of TB, having but a solitary functioning lung and that lung now

functioning so badly, so porous and spongy, so full of inflam-

mation, palpitation, granulation and catarrh, you could almost

wring it out, had brought into this world a baby as ugly as a

bug, a baby that was also visibly on its way out of it, so allowing

yours truly to act without that compunction, contrition and

attrition that usually accompany a killing - for it would go with

its mama into God's kingdom whilst I had a vacant cot for my

last child!"

2 5 9

"What?" said Amaury. "So Douglas, Olga's husband . . ."

"And paramour!"

". . . was also Olga's sibling!"

"That's right."

"Oh calamity!" said Amaury, almost indistincdy; and, follow-

ing an instant without saying a word, "But what of your two

sons - you know, whom you brought up on your own?"

For sixty months or so it wasn't all that bad. But (I was now

living in Ajaccio, that's in Corsica, you know) a day was to dawn

on which I took my two infants out to play in a small public

suburban park not too far from a wood. Thirsty, and imagining

I wasn't running any risk, I found my way to a bar to drink a

cold soda pop, a 7-Up, I think. Just as I was savouring it, and

chatting away to a bosomy young barmaid, a horrifying cry was

to jolt us both.

I quickly put down my glass and ran out, to find that that park

that I'd thought so ordinary, so innocuous, was now in total

confusion, full of sobbing matrons, swooning maids and livid

municipal guards. What was going on? Alas, I soon found out,

picking it up through an orgy of sniffling, blubbing, moaning,

groaning and hanky-wringing.

What I was told was that a tall, skinny man sporting an

amorphous sort of cap, playing a jaunty air on what I think you

call a kazoo, and coming out of that adjoining wood, had with

his music drawn a crowd of infants around him, including my

pair, and gradually, insidiously, drawn it away with him back

into it. Following a hiatus during which nobody had any notion

what to do, a hunt was got up, chasing him and sniffing him

out, scouring scrubland and shrubland, patrolling, raking soil and

looking for footprints. All, though, in vain. In addition, it was

said that this was a wood that had its own gang of bandits,

cutthroats notorious for holding infants to ransom or robbing

adults, so that, not surprisingly, nobody was willing to go all

that far into it.

Concurring with this opinion, my initial assumption was that

2 6 0

it was a strictly random affair, that this atrocity, striking down

all that's most virginal and incorrupt in our civilisation, had noth-

ing to do with that horror that was pursuing us.

But, within four days, I found out from my Figaro that your

firstborn son, Aignan, who was 20 and participating in a Martial

Cantaral Foundation symposium on pathovocalisation, a sym-

posium that (a fact by which I was also struck) had as its chairman

my own boss, Gadsby V. Wright, was, how shall I say, kaput.

And I thought it all too obvious that, at Ajaccio as at Oxford,

our Bushy Man was now moving into action . . .

Amaury abruptly cut in. "So you found out about Aignan and

his . . . his dying in that awful fashion?"

"I did."

"But why didn't you go to Oxford for his burial? For it was

your opportunity of making contact with your sibling, of our

talking, of my finding out at last that this lunatic was pursuing

us and possibly of our taking communal action against him."

"In fact, my original plan was instandy to fly to Britain. And,

with that in mind, I rang up Lord Wright who, or so I was told

by him, had caught sight of an unknown man accompanying

Aignan to his symposium, a day prior to his vanishing act - a

man, I should point out, with a bushy chin. I was conscious that,

if I was to turn up at his burial, that man would know what I

was doing in Oxford and so, obviously, who I was. As my incog-

nito was, I thought, vital, I didn't go, hoping soon to contact

you in privacy - probably by post."

For an instant I was struck by how unusually stiff Amaury was

growing. Finally, in an faindy ominous pitch, this is what was

said by him:

"You thought, you thought! You, you, always you! By not

going to Oxford, by not risking your own skin, you simply forgot

to pass on information about that shadow that was falling upon

us. For you it was unimportant, it was trifling, it was trivial, it

just wasn't worth talking about, that cross I had to carry! That

2 6 1

son I had to carry - carry to his tomb! You had an opportunity

to inform your own kith and kin  but, oh no, not you! Knowing

all about it as you did, it didn't occur to you to say a word! Your

sin by omission is, in my opinion, as shocking a sin, as mortal a

sin, as our papa's sin by commission. But that blood that's flowing

by your sin, by your omission, is now, and by my own hand,

about to abandon your body, just as would a pack of rats from

a sinking ship!"

It was obvious that poor Amaury was raving, half out of his

mind, for I saw him pick up a thick black andiron and start

walking forward with a low animal growl.

In my turn I took a pick, hoping to ward off his attack with

it. But that attack didn't actually occur. For, during his approach,

it was as though Amaury was abrupdy drawn back by an almost

inhuman compulsion - an aura of physical might that was pulling

him down, down, down, into that gigantic basin of oil.

Giving out a bloodcurdling cry, slipping and falling, as though

no laws of gravity could apply to him now, Amaury spun around

and in a flash was out of sight. . .

2 6 2

V I

A R T H U R W I L B U R G

SAVORGNAN

25

Which contains, in its last paragraph, a highly

significant blank

"And so," says Savorgnan, finally rounding off his account, "it

was all up with Amaury Conson."

"By Baour Lormian, translator of Ossian," says Swann, using

with obvious satisfaction a florid oath from his childhood, "that's

a fascinating story all right. But I could point out a handful of

contradictions in it."

"I know, I know," says Savorgnan. "For, if my chronology is

right, Amaury's own fatality should not occur prior to that of

Yvon, his lastborn son. But whilst, worn out, I was snoozing

upstairs, am I right in thinking you told Squaw of Yvon's liqui-

dation?"

"That I did," Swann admits. "You know your onions, Arthur,

I must say. That wasn't what I was thinking of, though. What I

found contradictory was that, if your lunatic dad did away with

all six of your offspring - with Anton Vowl, Douglas Haig

Clifford, Olga Clifford Mavrokhordatos, Hassan Ibn Abbou

and that pair of sons that you brought up on your own and that

your papa would spirit away from you in a distant past - why not

you? By rights, your surviving such a holocaust is illogical."

"It's a fact that's also running through my own mind," says

Savorgnan, visibly quaking. "I know, too, that it'll soon swoop

down, thus putting a final point to all this horror that's blighting

my family."

But Swann again contradicts him.

2 6 5

"No, it's a final point only if you all know your lot, your fatum,

as in all good fiction."

With a look of contrition, Ottavio Ottaviani tugs at his chin.

'That's right, Ottavio," says Aloysius Swann. "It's your turn

now to hold forth."

"But, boss," Ottaviani stubbornly insists, "my opinion isn't

worth a sparrow's fart - so it's always said."

"Now now, don't go putting on airs," says his boss jovially.

"I can't wait - and I know I'm talking for all of us - to find out

what you plan to say to us."

Ottaviani sighs and starts talking.

"It was on my third birthday that, in Corsica, in a public park

in Ajaccio, a tall, skinny chap cast a charm upon us, fascinating

us, luring us away into a wood, kidnapping us -"

"Oh God, it's my son!" howls Savorgnan.

"Daddy!" sobs Ottaviani, taking him in his arms and hugging

him.

"But, son," says Savorgnan, cuddling him in a spasm of patriar-

chal passion, "which of you is it - Ulrich or Yorick?"

"I'm Ulrich. That's to say, I was Ulrich at first. But I was

caught, along with my sibling, by a bandit, who taught us how

to snatch cocks and ducks from all kinds of country bumpkins,

and I was finally sold, for an insultingly low sum, I must say, to

a local infantryman from whom I think I got my vocation as cop.

Yorick was sold, too, to a carnival showman known as Gribaldi."

"So my son Ulrich is still living," says Savorgnan with a loud

sigh. "So you didn't fall victim to that Law, that 'I for an I'. But

what of Yorick?"

"Yorick took off with his carnival for Bonifacio, whilst Ottavi-

ani, by whom I was brought up, bought a small bungalow for

us in Bastia. I didn't know in which city Yorick was living. And

though, in my 20s, I occasionally had to go to Bonifacio for a

job, I couldn't find any hint of Yorick or his carnival.

"All I found out about him was his studying music - drums,

so I was told - and boarding a brig bound for Livorno, for that

2 6 6

showman guy, an Albanian by birth, thus a Tuscan, had a wish,

prior to cashing in his chips, for a last, nostalgic look at that

district still so familiar to him from his youth . . ."

Swann laughs - abrupriy, harshly.

"You want to know if Yorick is still living? You want him

living, don't you, for that would imply your own survival. No

such luck, I'm afraid! Yorick got his about 25 springs ago . . ."

"Alas, poor Yorick!" says Savorgnan, his vision misting up.

"Voila," says Swann, brandishing a small black book. "Know

what this is? It's my adjutant Pons's account of Yorick Gribaldi's

dying:

Wasqu'lham: Today, Monday 28 July, a trio of conscripts is

found missing from our battalion's barracks at morning roll

call. Adjutant Boutz is furious:

"Six days!" Boutz shouts at his corporal. "I'm giving you

just six days to put your hands, and your handcuffs, on that

band of fucking good-for-nothings!"

But four days pass and our arrogant trio is still AWOL.

"Ifs Biribi for all of'm!"growls Boutz.

Boutz informs Major Glupf his commandant, who says in

his forthright way that his garrison must do all it can to catch

and bring back, a.s.a.p., living or not, hussars Pitchu, Folkoch

and Worms, to stand trial in a court martial, on an accusa-

tion of disloyalty to Wasqu'lham's population.

Glupf consigns his garrison to barracks, mobilising six bat-

talions, guns at hand, and promising thirty ducats to any

man with vital information to supply. But this award brings

in only a bit of salacious gossip that, frankly, has nothing to do

with anything. Rummaging through a train and dragging a

canal also fails to turn up trumps.

Now Boutz has to inform his major of an infantryman

going AWOL in his turn: Ibrahim, a Roman by origin, 25,

a corporal, a Military Cross and in addition Glupf s cousin!

And, in 24 hours, a Tuscan drum-major, Gribaldi, follows

suit, making 5 AWOLS in all, in just six days!

26 7

Boutz, running out of things to do, frowns. It's lucky that

his nation is not at war and that its King's dying, with lots

of public oratorios, has brought a modicum of calm and har-

mony to its population.

A furious Major Glupf insists on having a total blackout;

and, his confining his garrison to barracks proving hard on

local shops and bars, has to justify it publicly by giving out a

rumour (phony, naturallyj about an assassination of Lord

Horatio. Mobilisation, it's said, is about to follow any day.

Glupf also craftily finds out, during his inquiry, that our

skiving bastards had a point in common: about a day prior

to going AWOL, all had drunk a glass of schnapps in a

local bar, Conscript's Arms, adjoining a municipal abattoir

- a bar which has a barmaid, Rosa, with a notorious passion

for dragoons.

So, substituting civilian clothing for his uniform with its

dazzling gold braid, Oskar Glupf thinks it worth having a

look at this squaddfs hang-out. With a guard standing

watch not too far o f f , Glupf sits down and has a bock, paying

for it with a gold florin.

Noticing that Rosa is washing out cups and tankards in a

sink, Glupf starts chatting about this and that, but, by Saint

Stanislas, and notwithstanding all his cunning, gains noth-

ing for his pains.

His suspicion, though, is still stuck on this barmaid, who

(so common gossip has it), acting for a rival country trying

hard to suck his own into an all-out war, is guilty of inciting

his troops, doughboy and NCO, infantryman and dragoon,

hussar and spahi, to turn traitor. But, with six battalions on

constant patrol, with road blocks cutting off local highways,

how could anybody possibly find a way out? So it's Glupf s

opinion that his band of missing hussars is still lying doggo

in Rosa's bar.

But how to find out? That day, without any obviously

logical motivation, Glupf has Rosa's sink and its canalisation

2 6 8

dug up. Nothing. And pays a visit to Rosa's upstairs room,

tapping its walls, poking around on its roof. Nothing

again.

At last Rosa is brought in front of a military tribunal.

Without wasting an instant, and without mincing words,

an army solicitor shouts, "What did you do with our missing

hussars ? What did you do with Ibrahim, with Gribaldi and

with Worms, all of whom hang out at your bar? And what,

pray, did you do on Monday night, 28 July?"

But Rosa is a match for him.

"Worms? Gribaldi? Ibrahim? By all my holy saints, by my

darling Virgin Mary, I don't know any Worms, Gribaldi or

Ibrahim! Lots of troops hang out at my bar!"

"Harlot!" shouts out Glupf. "It's all around town!"

"I am? You liar! I got a boy of my own, a good boy, a

dragoon, who'll kill anybody that puts a hand on my body."

"Who is it! Who!"

"I obj-" a solicitor starts to say, until Glupf shouts him

down.

Finally an accusation of criminal disloyalty and incitation

to kill is brought against Rosa.

But in his own summing-up Rosa's solicitor shows that this

accusation has as its foundation not proof but only word-of

mouth, no convincing fact but only circumstantial supposition,

no probing point but only Major Glupf s wish, at any cost,

to vilify his antagonist.

So, to a standing ovation, with a host of "hurrahs" and

"bravos" and "attababys" from an approving public, Rosa is

found not guilty. Poor Glupf admits to losing - promising,

though, that only a fight and not a war is lost, that a day

will dawn, a day on which Rosa will find out who is truly in

command, a day on which Auschwitz will turn up its gas

- and strolls out whistling a military march.

Within six days of that trial, a commando attacks Rosa's

bar with a bazooka. Body upon body, carcass upon carcass,

2 6 9

is found, including Rosa's, but not including Gribaldi's or

Ibrahim's or that of any missing conscript. . .

"Now I'd call that totally unambiguous," says Swann, concluding

his curious account.

"Why, not at all," says Savorgnan, instantly contradicting him.

"I'm willing to go along with you on Yorick's going AWOL, but

not on his dying."

"Arthur's right - not on his dying," says Ottaviani, parrot-

fashion, hoping to sound brainy by imitating his dad.

"As Rosa's bar, not surprisingly, was blown to bits, with not

a wall standing," says Swann, "Glupf and his troops had to start

bulldozing away a mass of bricks and mortar and tiling and stuff,

and a watch was found, a charming rococo watch with, on its

dial, a ribbon of gold garlands of Arab origin - a watch, I might

add, which Yorick Gribaldi had bought just that month."

"But who's to know it wasn't a gift from Yorick to Rosa?"

"That's right - a gift from Yorick to Rosa," parrots Ottaviani.

"Hmm, all right," admits Swann, "on its own it isn't implicit

proof of Yorick's dying. But I'll furnish you now with a truly

convincing proof. This, ab absurdo, is my postulation:

"Assuming that Yorick is in fact kaput, all anybody has to do

is kill Ottavio Ottaviani, alias Ulrich Savorgnan, so that instantly,

according to that old family law, Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan,

having no son still living, will fall victim to it in his turn!"

"Cunning!" clucks Squaw.

"Inhuman!" shouts Savorgnan.

"Nazi!" spits out Ottaviani.

"And, in fact," says Swann almost nonchalandy, "I think I'll

find out if my solution works. First of all, I'll kill Ottavio, who's

starting to put my back up anyway."

"But why?" says Ottaviani imploringly. "I'm too young!"

"Now now, Ottavio, I want no grumbling from you," says his

boss. "Wasn't it obvious to you that a climax was approaching

fast?"

2 7 0

Ottaviani starts sobbing.

"But it's got nothing to do with -"

"Button your lip, you moron!" roars Swann, pounding him

on his skull. "Why don't you look at this communication that

was put into my hands not long ago?"

Swann unlocks his holdall, draws out a manuscript and hands

it to Ottaviani.

"Why Ottaviani?" asks Squaw, who was obviously not au fait

with Swann's tactics.

"You'll find out," murmurs Swann, smiling sardonically.

"Aloud, Ottavio, s'il vous plait."

Adjusting his lorgnon, coughing, swallowing, gargling,

Ottaviani gulps and, with a slightly pompous intonation, starts:

"I'm going to rock this child in his cot ," sighs Orgon, son of

Ubu. "I'm going to wolf down mutton, broccoli, dumplings,

rich plum pudding. I'm going to drink, not grog, but punch."

Orgon drinks hock, too, rum, Scotch, plus two hot brimming

mugs ofBovril to finish up with, which soon prompts him to

nod off. Running brooks drown out his snoring. I stroll to

rocks on which I too will nod o f f , with Orgon's dozing son,

with Orgon, son of Ubu.

Condors swoop down on us. Poor scrofulous lions slink out,

scrutinising dingos with scornful looks. Chipmunks run wild.

Opossums run, too, without stopping. North or south? I

wouldn't know. Plunging off clifftops, bison split limbs in two.

It hurts. Ivy grows on brick, rising up from stucco pots to

shroud windows or roofs.

Prom Ubu's bottom drops his own bulk in gold.

"Hmm," says Savorgnan, having difficulty in disguising his con-

fusion.

"What!" says Swann, as if furious at Savorgnan's stupidity,

"isn't it obvious what's so fascinating about it?"

"Frankly, no."

"Look at it, Savorgnan - it hasn't got a solitary 'a'!"

2 7 1

"Good God!" says Savorgnan, snatching it out of Ottaviani's

hands and staring at it. "It hasn't at that!"

"Mindblowing!" says Squaw.

"Fascinating," Savorgnan concurs, "just fascinating."

"And in addition," adds Swann, "I can find just a solitary y

in it  in 'ivy'!"

"Astonishing! Amazing! Astounding!"

Ottaviani finally asks for his manuscript back. Savorgnan hands

it to him and, as though only now grasping its import, Ottaviani

quickly scans it, moving his lips but not saying a word.

"So, Ottavio," says Swann sarcastically, "do you catch on

now?"

Ottaviani looks ill, squirming in his chair, shaking uncon-

trollably, finding it impossibly difficult to say what's on his mind.

"I . . . I . . ."

"What?"

Crumpling up, Ottavio Ottaviani murmurs in a dying fall:

"Nor has it got a solitary

2 7 2

26

Which, as you must know by now, is this book's last

"Pardon?" say his two companions, who hadn't caught that

Omission of which only Ottaviani was conscious.

But Ottaviani says nothing, making only a short, sharp sound

- a kind of pop or plop, a tiny bit grating, a tiny bit irritating,

but so soft you almost instantly forgot it.

Squaw abruptly cuts in with a mournful cry.

"What is it?" asks Swann, blanching.

"Ottaviani! Ottaviani!" howls Squaw.

Crimson, florid, Ottaviani starts inflating. As imposing and

plump as Buck Mulligan standing on top of a spiral stairway

whilst intoning an "Introibo", his slowly magnifying body brings

to mind a purplish balloon, of a sort that you might buy for your

child in Paris Montsouris.

And, in a twinkling, just as such a balloon will combust if

brought into contact with a sharp point, Ottaviani burst, his

body ripping apart, making a din as loud as an aircraft attaining

Mach III and outstripping sound with a mirror-smashing bang.

And, in an instant, not a nail, not a button - poor Ottaviani

is nothing but a puny, chalky mass as small as a tiny turd of ash

from a cigar but so oddly whitish in colour you might think it

was talc.

Savorgnan stands dumbstruck, stiff and still. His two last sons

dying in turn, two sons long thought in Abraham's bosom,

abruptly brought back to him and now just as abruptly dying

again  it was obviously too much for him. Sobbing, vainly trying

to control his sorrow, this poor papa says to Swann:

2 7 3

"I'm right in thinking, am I not, that you did all his dirty work

- you did just what that Bushy Man told you to do?"

"I wouldn't put it that way - but I was his faithful right hand,

you know, his front, his proconsul. . ."

"No, I didn't know . . ."

"It was staring at you, though."

"I don't follow you."

"What is implicit in 'Aloysius Swann' if not 'a blank cygnal'?"

Savorgnan sighs, continuing, "As this is obviously my last call,

my last hurrah, may I know how it is that I'm to quit this world

of ours? For, if I know you, you won't disappoint your victim

with any humdrum sort of killing!"

uOh la la" says Swann, cackling, "I can think of about 5 amus-

ingly roundabout ways of killing you.

"I could first of all, finding you caught up in a work of fiction,

a book by Zola, say, from his Rougon-Macquart saga (but not

L'Assomnwir, possibly Nana) - I could hand you a fruit that had

a bomb in it: an apricot, a cantaloup, or possibly an ananas, that

sanguinary fruit that Lyndon B. Johnson, day in, day out, would

drop on Hanoi, not giving a hoot for any notion of supranational

rights, as many political symposia would forthrightly affirm. Any-

way, my cunning apparatus would go off just as, hot and thirsty,

you cut your ananas in two, so blowing you sky-high.

"Or I could also, using a nodal cord, submit to amputation,

mutilation, incision, ablation, castration, abscission, scission,

omission or division that most vital part of your body - your

cock, your prick, your manly organ - or, possibly, by a kind of

phallic symbolism, just your snout, an act that would kill you off

within six months at most.

"Or, if I sought a truly outlandish solution, I could, in a

country wood in which you had a habit of taking your consti-

tutional, look, in an oak or a birch, for a good roosting spot for

birds and submit its occupants to a fatal quantity of radioactivity

(a milligram of uranium would do, its fission producing a strong

gamma ray). In addition, not far from that oak or birch, I'd

2 7 4

simply drop a big bag of fondants  I know how fond of fondants

my old chum Arthur is. So, strolling to and fro, idly larking

about, nibbling on cat's-tails and cowslips, you catch sight of this

alluring bag of bonbons. Pouncing gluttonously on it, you sit

down to stuff your gob and, just at that instant, from out of

said oak or birch, birds start dropping on to you, birds full of

radioactivity, irradiating your body with maximum impact.

"Or I could go about it this way.

"You'd fly out to Japan for a gala. In Tokyo, for I know your

skill at Go, you'd no doubt want to watch a foolhardy tyro taking

on a champion, Kaku Takagawa, a 'Kan Shu', if not actually a

'Kudan', in a local charity match - taking him on, as I say, but

obviously with a strong handicap to assist him, not a 'fiirin' but

a 'Naka yotsu'. Kaku Takagawa would start with a 'Moku had-

zushi' and, his antagonist lost in a 'Ji dori Go' as clumsy as it was

vain (what you should play is, as you know, Arthur, a Takamoku

Kakari'), would triumphantly follow it up with an 'Ozaru' (or

'Grand Baboon's Gambit', as it's still known) and, rounding it

off with a brilliant 'Oi Otoshi', win by a 'Naka oshi gatchi', to

acclamation from an approving public.

"But, Takagawa having won his match, a production of a Noh

play would follow, a play you'd find both long and mystifying.

You'd want at first to go, but, out of tact to your hosts, you'd

try to follow it for an act or so and, by constantly consulting a

fitfully illuminating synopsis, try to grasp a word, a look, a sound,

a hint of fury, of sorrow, of passion, that would allow you to

know what it was all about, allow you to know what was going

on not all that far from your fourth-row chair but what simply

wasn't swimming into focus, just as a man who, rapt in a book,

a work of fiction, constandy hoping for a solution, for a solution

that's driving him crazy by lurking just out of his grasp, a solution

that has had throughout, in fact from its first word, an infuriating

habit of staring at him whilst continually avoiding his own scru-

tiny, might find, advancing into its story, nothing but ambiguous

mystification and rationalisation, obscurantism and obfiiscation,

2 7 5

all of it consigning to a dim and murky chiaroscuro that ambition,

so to say, that lit its author's lamp.

"So at last, worn out by such taxing brainwork, you'd nod off,

just as a dog would if Pavlov, stimulating it with a salivating

aroma, didn't follow it up with a gift of a juicy chop, thus maxi-

mally inhibiting its cortico-subcortico-cortical circuit, that which

controls its instincts, its 'arousal', as biologists say. And, at that

instant, I'd find it child's play to bump you off.

"Or, finally (I told you, did I not, that I had 5 options), I

could attack you whilst idly strolling in a public park admiring

statuary by such as Girardon or Coustou, Gimond or, most par-

ticularly, Rodin. All I'd do is clutch in my fist a jack, a car jack, so

that, as you stood in front of a Rodin, say, studying its imposing

contours, I'd simply undo that bolt that maintains it upright,

causing it to fall and crush you."

"Nobody, I think," says Arthur Wilburg Savorgnan, "could

claim that I was lacking in humour. So I applaud your final spasm

of imagination. But, if you want my opinion, I truly don't know

how you could, at this instant, bring about my downfall in any

such outlandish fashion. For, if I'm not wrong, this room con-

tains nothing at all of what you want - no igniting fruit or nodal

cord or radiating birds or Go board or Rodin statuary."

"Don't think I'm not conscious of that," says Swann icily. "But

I'm carrying at my hip a plaything that I find is just as handy!"

So saying, Swann draws out a Smith-Corona pistol and, with-

out pausing for an instant, shoots Savorgnan point-blank.

"Voila," says Squaw, in a sort of monosyllabic singsong, "all

kaput. All kaput. Who would think it? And, you know, I find

this conclusion just a tiny bit anticlimactic, a tiny bit Much Ado

About Nothing, a bit irritating, a bit discouraging, don't you

think?"

"Oh, cht va piano va sano," says Swann, smiling. "All kaput, as you say. And all worthy of absolution; all, I pray, worthy of

magnanimity and pardon. For, though guilty of many criminal

acts, of many sins, our companions did, you must admit, furnish

2 7 6

a constant and unfailing collaboration. And I can think of many

a protagonist, factual or fictional, who hasn't had to put up with

so rigorous a constraint. In this story, though, our lot would

confront it unflinchingly from start to finish . . ."

"Shut up," murmurs Squaw, to Swann's mortification, "you

talk too much . . ."

"So now," says Squaw again, "is this actually our Finis Coronat

Opus? Is this how our story must finish? Is this its last word?"

"It is," says Swann, "it is. This circuitous labyrinth, through

which all of us would drift with a somnambulist's languorous

gait, driving our plot forward with our contribution to it, our

participation in it, moving on and on, braving its paralysing

taboo, concocting out of that taboo, to a point of saturation, a

story which, with all its manifold ramifications, would abolish

what you might call its random factor only at a cost of our giving

up any claim to a solution, similar to a lamp illuminating, and

fitfully, only part of our path, according us only a hint, an inkling,

of what is lying in front of us, of what is awaiting us - it is, I

say, fast approaching its conclusion, its last word. But Franz

Kafka said it first: you know what your goal is but you don't

know of any path to that goal and what you call a path is only

your own blind, groping doubt.

"All of us did, notwithstanding, go forward, slowly, haltingly,

approaching a final point, for a final point was obligatory in a

story such as ours, imagining, too, on occasion, that it was obvi-

ous what that final point was, confronting a 'What?' with a That5,

a Why' with a Tor\ a 'How5 with a This Way' or a 'That Way'.

"But an illusion was always lurking in such solutions, an illu-

sion of wisdom, wisdom to which not any of us could truly lay

claim, not our protagonists, not our author, and not I, Swann,

his faithful right hand, and it was that lack of wisdom, that

chronic inability of ours to grasp what was actually going on,

that had us talking away, constructing our story, building up its

idiotic plot, inflating all its intrinsic bombast, its absurd hocus-

pocus, without at any instant attaining its cardinal point, its

2 7 7

horizon, its infinity, that climactic coda of harmony out of which

a solution would at long last loom,

but approaching, by an inch, by a micron, by an angstrom,

that fatal point at which,

without that taboo constituting us and uniting us and drawing

us apart,

a void,

a void with its brass hands,

a void with its cold, numb hands,

a void rubbing out its own inscription,

a void assuring this Book, of all Books, a truly singular purity

and immaculation, notwithstanding all its markings in ink and

paragraphs of print,

a void brings our story to its conclusion."

2 7 8

P O S T S C R I P T

On that ambition, conspicuous throughout this tiring book

which you will soon shut, having had your fill of it without,

I trust, skipping too much - on that ambition, so to say,

which lit its author's lamp

My ambition, as Author, my point, I would go so far as to say

my fixation, my constant fixation, was primarily to concoct an

artifact as original as it was illuminating, an artifact that would,

or just possibly might, act as a stimulant on notions of construc-

tion, of narration, of plotting, of action, a stimulant, in a word,

on fiction-writing today.

Whilst, in my first books, writing principally about my situ-

ation, my psychology, my social background, my capacity (or

incapacity) of adaptation, my mania for commodification (almost

tantamount, as is said on occasion, to what you might call "thing-

ification"), it was my wish, by drawing inspiration from a

(modish) linguistic dogma claiming primacy for what Saussurian

structuralists call a signifiant - it was my wish, I say, to polish

up this tool that I had at my disposal, a tool that until now I

would ply without pain or strain; not that it was my ambition

to diminish any contradiction intrinsic to such a constraint nor,

naturally, that I was wholly unconscious of it, but by contrast

that I thought I might fulfil such an ambition by fully assuming

that (as I say) modish structuralist dogma, which was, in my

writing of this book, not a handicap, not a constriction, but, all

in all, a spur to my imagination.

What was my purport in imposing this constraint? Offhand,

with hindsight, I can think of many factors bubbling about in

2 8 1

my brain, but I ought to admit right away that its origin was

totally haphazard, touch and go, a flip of a coin. It all got out

of hand with a companion calling my bluff (I said I could do it,

this companion said I could not); and I should admit, too, that

so inauspiciously shaky was that launching pad, I had no inkling

at all that, as an acorn contains an oak, anything solid would

grow out of it.

Initially I found such a constraint faintly amusing, if that; but

I stuck to my guns. At which point, finding that it took my

imagination down so many intriguing linguistic highways and

byways, I couldn't stop thinking about it, plunging into it again

and again, at last giving up all my ongoing work, much of which

I was actually about to finish.

So was born, word by word, and paragraph by paragraph, a

book caught within a formalist grid doubly arduous in that it

would risk striking as insignificant anybody ignorant of its sol-

ution, a book that, crankily idiosyncratic as it no doubt is, I

instantly found thoroughly satisfying:

a) I, as an author, having not an iota of inspiration (and, in

addition, placing no faith at all in inspiration as a Platonic form!)

was displaying in this book just as much imagination as a Ponson

or a Paulhan; and (b) I was, most notably, and to my own total

gratification, slaking a thirst as constant as it is callow (not to

say childish): a soft spot on my part - what am I saying? a passion

- for accumulation, saturation, imitation, quotation, translation

and automatisation.

And soon, my faith in my ability to carry it off growing day

by day, I thought I might start giving my plotting a symbolic

turn, so that, by following my book's story hand in hand until

totally coinciding with it, it would point up, without blatantly

divulging, that Law that was its inspiration, that Law from which

it would draw, not without occasional friction, and not without

occasional vulgarity, but also not without occasional humour,

nor, I think, without brio, a rich, fruitful narration, honing my

writing skills in unthought-of ways.

2 8 2

I was thus to grasp a significant fact: that, just as, say, Frank

Lloyd Wright built his own working and living conditions, so

was I fashioning, mutatis mutandis, a prototypical product which

- spurning that paradigm of articulation, organisation and

imagination dominant in today's fiction, abandoning for good

that rampant psychologisation which, along with a bias towards

mawkish moralising (in fact, not so much mawkish as downright

mawk), is still for most critics a mainspring of our national gift for

(or myth of?) "clarity" and "proportion" and "polish" - sought inspiration in a linguistic avant-gardism virtually unknown in this

country, and for which no critic has a good word in so far as

it's known at all, but which allows of a possibility of imitating,

simulating and honouring a tradition that has brought forth a

Gargantua and a Tristram Shandy and a Mathias Sandorf and a Locus Solus and (why not?) a Bijur or a Four bis, books for which I had sworn undying admiration, without daring to harbour any

illusions that I might possibly attain in any of my own works

such jubilation and such fanciful humour, by dint of irony and

wit, paradox and prodigality, by dint, in short, of an imagination

knowing just how far to go too far.

So, as I think, in this work, for all that its origin was chaotic,

I finally did satisfy most of my goals and obligations. Not only

did I spin out a fairly straightforward story but I had a lot of fun

with it (wasn't it Raymond Q. Knowall who said that it was

hardly worth writing if it was simply as a soporific?), fun, princi-

pally (by locating and disclosing that contradiction in which all

syntactic, structural or symbolic signification is bound up), in my

ambition of participating, of collaborating, in a common policy

to adopt a radical, wilfully conflictual position vis-a-vis fiction, a

position that, implicitly critical as it is of a Troyat, a Mauriac, a

Blondin or a Cau, of any Quai Conti, Figaro or Prix Goncourt

hack, might still chart a path along which fiction could again find

an inspiration, a charm, a stimulus, in narrational virtuosity of a

sort thought lost for good.

2 8 3

FINIS A VOID

UNOIA

for Hans Arp

Awkward grammar appals a craftsman. A Dada bard as daft as Tzara damns stagnant art and scrawls an alpha (a slapdash arc and a backward zag) that mars all stanzas and jams all ballads (what a scandal). A madcap vandal crafts a small black ankh  a hand-stamp that can stamp a wax pad and at last plant a mark that sparks an ars magna (an abstract art that charts a phrasal anagram). A pagan skald chants a dark saga (a Mahabharata), as a papal cabal blackballs all annals and tracts, all dramas and psalms: Kant and Kafka, Marx and Marat. A law as harsh as a fatwa bans all paragraphs that lack an A as a standard hallmark.

Hassan Abd al-Hassad, an Agha Khan, basks at an ashram  a Taj Mahal that has grand parks and grass lawns, all as vast as parklands at Alhambra and Valhalla. Hassan can, at a hand clap, call a vassal at hand and ask that all staff plan a bacchanal  a gala ball that has what pagan charm small galas lack. Hassan claps, and (tah-dah) an Arab lass at a swank spa can draw a mans bath and wash a mans back, as Arab lads fawn and hang, athwart an altar, amaranth garlands as fragrant as attar  a balm that calms all angst. A dwarf can flap a palm branch that fans a fat maharajah. A naphtha lamp can cast a calm warmth.

Hassan asks that a vassal grant a man what manna a man wants: Alaskan crabs, alfalfa salad and kasha, Malahat clams, lasagna pasta and salsa. Hassan wants Kalamata shawarma, cassabananas and taramasalata. Hassan gnaws at a calf flank and chaws at a lamb shank, as a charman chars a black bass and salts a bland carp. Hassan scarfs back gravlax and sprats, crawdad and prawns, balks at Parma ham, and has, as a snack, canard  lananas sans safran. Hassan asks that a vassal grant a man jam tarts and bananas, jam flans and casabas, halva, pap-padam and challah, babka, fasnacht and baklava.

Hassan can watch cancan gals cha-cha-cha, as brass bands blat jazz razzmatazz (what a class act). Rapt fans at a bandstand can watch jazzbands that scat a waltz and a samba. Fans clap as a fat-cat jazzman and a bad-ass bassman blab gangsta rap  a gangland fad that attacks what Brahms and Franck call art: a Balkan czardas, a Tartar tandava (sarabands that can charm a saltant chap at a danza). Bach can craft a Catalan sardana that attracts lAfghan chantant  lamant dansant. A sax drawls tantaras (all A-flats and an A-sharp): fa-la-la-la-la. A maraca rasps cantatas. A lass as sad as a swan twangs a glass harp.

Hassan can ask that a barman at a bar tap a cask and draw a man a draft (half a dram, a glass): marc, grappa and armagnac, malt, arrack and schnapps. Gangs that act as crass as Harvard grads at a frat (Gamma Kappa Lambda) clack tankards and gawk at a gal, as a gal dabs at black mascara. Rash lads that harass vamps and bawds catcall a brash tramp: caramba  what a tart. A bacchant lad asks a madam (as drachmas pass hands): what carnal acts can a man transact? A gal can grab a mans balls and wank a mans shaft; a man can grasp a gals bra and spank a gals ass. A clasp snaps apart, and a scant shawl falls.

Hassan wants a catnap and grabs, as a calmant, hash, grass and smack, khat, ganja and tabac  an amalgam that can spark a pharmacal flashback. Hassan falls slack, arms asprawl, and has a nap that spawns dark phantasmata. Satan stands back, aback a damask arras, and draws a fractal mandala  a charm that can trap what a Cathar savant calls an astral avatar (part man, part bat  all fang and claw)  a phantasm that can snarl and gnash at a carcass. A fantast chants abracadabra as a mantra, wags a wand, and (zap) a sandglass cracks. A hag as mad as Cassandra warns a shah that bad karma attracts phantasmal cataclasms.

Hassan balks at all sacral tasks  a mass at Sabbath, a fast at Ramadan: what Kabbalah and Brahmana can match blackjack and baccarat? Hassan brags that a crackajack champ at cards lacks what knack Hassan has at craps. A cardsharp, smart at canasta, has a scam: mark a pack, palm a jack. (A cardmatch can act as a starchart that maps fata arcana.) A shah hazards all cash, stands pat and calls. A fatal pall wracks a casbah, as a charlatan fans a grandslam hand (damn, darn, drat rants a braggart). A rascal salaams and thanks Allah that a bank can award a man a stash that dwarfs what alms a raj can amass.

Hassan drafts a Magna Carta and asks that a taxman pass a Tax Act  a cash grab that can tax all farmland and grant a dastard at cards what hard cash Hassan lacks. Hassan asks that an apt draftsman map what ranchland a ranchhand can farm: all grasslands and pampas, all marshlands and swamps, flatlands and savannahs (standard badlands that spawn chaparral and crabgrass). Hassan asks that all farmhands at farms plant flax and award Hassan, as a tax, half what straw a landsman can stash at a barn. A ranchman at a ranch warns campagnards that a shah has spat at hard-and-fast laws that ban cadastral graft.

Hassan can tax a Saharan caravan that carts packs and sacks past bazaars at Aswan and Rabat, Basra and Dakar. Stalls at all marts hawk Baccarat glass. Stands at all malls hawk Macassar brass. A haggard almsman can drag a handcart and hawk glass jars (racks and racks): agar-agar  dammar lac and balsam sap (half a franc, a flask). A drab washman, half-clad at a washstand, can wash afghans and caftans, sandals and tabards, as a ragman darns rags and hawks ragtag garb: slacks, pajamas and pants, scarfs, cravats and spats. A chapman at a standard hatstand can hawk panama hats, canvas caps and tartan tams.

Hassan can tax all banal trash that vagrants at a plaza pawn and swap: ant farms and lava lamps, rat traps and lawn darts  chaff and draff that jampacks all trashcans. A trashman and a scrapman can pawn scrap parts: fans, amps and a dashlamp, rads, cams and a camshaft, gas tanks and clamps, car jacks and straps, hand-cranks that can crank a crankshaft. A lampman at a lampstand can hawk Argand lamps (all brands): arc lamps and gas lamps, flash-lamps that flash at half a watt. A sawman can hawk all handsaws and hacksaws, all bandsaws and backsaws, sharp saws that saw apart a flat-sawn plank.

Hassan at Arab talks can canvass all satraps and ask that Arab banks back what grand plans Hassan has (dams and canals at Panama, arks and wharfs at Havana  tasks that, as a drawback, warrant what Hassan calls a harsh tax plan). Hassan lacks tact, and (alas) a rajahs blatant sarcasm sparks a flagrant backlash as rampant as a vandals wrath. Hassan grandstands at a grandstand, as all thralls lash back, wag placards and rant a clamant rant. Arrant gangs clash and start brawls that trash rattan cabanas (what a fracas). A maharajah asks that a hangman hang all bastards and laggards that a lawman can catch.

Hassan can watch, aghast, as databanks at NASDAQ graph hard data and chart a NASDAQ crash  a sharp fall that alarms staff at a Manhattan bank. Hassan acts fast, ransacks cashbags at a mad dash, and grabs what bank drafts a bank branch at Casablanca can cash: marks, rands and bahts. Hassan asks that an adman draft a want ad that can hawk what canvas art Hassan has (a Cranach, a Cassatt and a Chagall). Hassan can fast-talk a chap at a watchstand and pawn a small watch that has, as a watchglass, a star padparadschah (half a grand, a carat). A shah can pack a bag, flag a cab and scram, catch-as-catch-can.

Hassan has a dacha at Kazakhstan, and at a small shack Hassan can hatch a dark plan. Hassan wants back what past landmass a shah has had (vacant tracts that span as far as Khanabad and Ashkhabad, Kandahar and Samarkand  landmarks that Kazakh anarchs smash apart and sack). Hassan can scan an atlas that maps Madagascar and all lands afar: Java, Malta and Japan, Chad, Ghana and Qatar, Canada and Lapland, Rwanda and Malabar. Hassan can scan an almanac that charts facts and stats at Dallas, Savannah and Atlanta (Kansas, Arkansas and Alabama). Hassan asks that banks at Warsaw and Gdansk fax Hassan a fax.

Hassan can start a war. Hassan marshalls an armada that can attack Javan wharfs at Jakarta. Hassan asks that all sampans trawl canals and chart thalassal hazards (sandbanks that can strand a small bark, cataracts that can thwart a balsa raft); catamarans as fast as narwhals dash past a sandbar and ram all naval craft that lack ballast at landfall. Masts snap. Spars warp. A gangplank cracks as backwash slams a carrack and swamps a canvas tarp (splash, splash). A raftsman and a hatchman bark avast and clamp a hatch, as all hands man a capstan and tack landward, hard abaft. A damp flag flaps at half-mast.

Hassan can watch as all hands land a small warcraft and camp at a lava sandflat  a basalt strand that has tar sands as black as magma ash. Wasps and gnats swarm as all hands stack sandbags and start a spartan camp. A campman, smart at campcraft, can spark a match and warm an ashpan that thaws what hardtack a clan wants: bran mash and lard, spam hash and salt, ballpark franks and flapjack stacks (all starch and fat). A packman at camp packs a backpack, a knapsack and a packsack. A watchman stands watch, as all ranks at dawn act as pawns that can marshall adamant brawn and march a harsh warpath.

Hassan can watch as a marksman tracks a stag, a hart and a fawn, and at last bags a ram (a bwana as smart as Tarzan can trap all mammals: alpacas and llamas, caracals and pandas, aardvarks that can catch larval ants). Hawks and larks dart past tamaracks, as jackdaws and mallards flap past catalpas and land athwart a larch (sparhawks and caracaras scrawk at blackcaps and avadavats). A bantam jacamar can stand athwart a jacaranda branch and catch all scarabs that gnaw at sassafras bark. A jackal stalks an addax. A Manx cat nabs a pack rat. A black asp crawls past a sawgrass marsh that has algal tarns.

Macaws caw as a phalanx tramps past a tall alp (a stark crag that dwarfs all scarps and chasms), and at a dark pass all ranks halt, stand fast and attack a vast barracks that has ramparts and catwalks. A Spartan axman as stalwart as Ajax grabs an ax and hacks at a swart clansman: whack, whack. A Rwandan man-at-arms grasps an atlatl and casts a fatal shaft that can stab a grand marshall. A Slav warman as gallant as Galahad (and DArtagnan) clasps a scabbard and draws a katana that can smash a mans brassards and slash a mans flancards. A sharp hand adz can bash a mans arms and gash a mans gams: swack, swack.

Alarms clang as a radarman tracks an attack craft that can jam radar and dart past flak at half a Mach: ack-ack-ack, rat-tat-tat. Vaward attacks blast apart hangars and tarmacs: blam, blam. Plasma blasts scald asphalt; napalm blasts parch macadam (glass shards act as haphazard abradants that sandblast all landwrack). Tanks clank and clack, as halftracks attack flatcars and tramcars: bang, bang. Cars and vans crash. A Mazda hatchback and a Saab smack a tram: wham, wham. A mad labman at a lab crafts an anthrax gas that can waft past all walls at a stalag and harm war camps that lack standard gas masks.

Hassan gags and has an asthma attack  a catarrh as fatal as lhasa and hanta. Cramps as sharp as darts and barbs jab and jag at gastral tracts. Carpal pangs gnarl a mans hands and cramp a mans palms. Hassan asks that a shaman abstract a talc cataplasm that can thwart a blatant rash (raw scars that can scar a mans scalp and gall a mans glans: scratch, scratch). A warm saltbath can blanch all plantar warts and stanch all palatal scabs. A transplant can patch a basal gland. A bald shah barfs and farts as a labman bawls: plasma, stat (alas, alack: a shah has a grand mal spasm and, ahh, gasps a schwa, as a last gasp).



for Dick Higgins

Writing is inhibiting. Sighing, I sit, scribbling in ink this pidgin script. I sing with nihilistic witticism, disciplining signs with trifling gimmicks  impish hijinks which highlight stick sigils. Isnt it glib? Isnt it chic? I fit childish insights within rigid limits, writing shtick which might instill priggish misgivings in critics blind with hindsight. I dismiss nitpicking criticism which flirts with philistinism. I bitch; I kibitz  griping whilst criticizing dimwits, sniping whilst indicting nitwits, dismissing simplistic thinking, in which philippic wit is still illicit.

Pilgrims, digging in shifts, dig till midnight in mining pits, chipping flint with picks, drilling schist with drills, striking it rich mining zinc. Irish firms, hiring micks whilst firing Brits, bring in smiths with mining skills: kilnwrights grilling brick in brickkilns, millwrights grinding grist in gristmills. Irish tinsmiths, fiddling with widgits, fix this rig, driving its drills which spin whirring drillbits. I pitch in, fixing things. I rig this winch with its wiring; I fit this drill with its piping. I dig this ditch, filling bins with dirt, piling it high, sifting it, till I find bright prisms twinkling with glitz.

Hiking in British districts, I picnic in virgin firths, grinning in mirth with misfit whims, smiling if I find birch twigs, smirking if I find mint sprigs. Midspring brings with it singing birds, six kinds (finch, siskin, ibis, tit, pipit, swift), whistling shrill chirps, trilling chirr chirr in high pitch. Kingbirds flit in gliding flight, skimming limpid springs, dipping wingtips in rills which brim with living things: krill, shrimp, brill  fish with gilt fins, which swim in flitting zigs. Might Virgil find bliss implicit in this primitivism? Might I mimic him in print if I find his writings inspiring?

Fishing till twilight, I sit, drifting in this birch skiff, jigging kingfish with jigs, bringing in fish which nip this bright string (its vivid glint bristling with stick pins). Whilst I slit this fish in its gills, knifing it, slicing it, killing it with skill, shipwrights might trim this jib, swinging it right, hitching it tight, riding brisk winds which pitch this skiff, tipping it, tilting it, till this ship in crisis flips. Rigging rips. Christ, this ship is sinking. Diving in, I swim, fighting this frigid swirl, kicking, kicking, swimming in it till I sight high cliffs, rising, indistinct in thick mists, lit with lightning.

Lightning blinks, striking things in its midst with blinding light. Whirlwinds whirl; driftwinds drift. Spindrift is spinning in thrilling whirligigs. Which blind spirit is whining in this whistling din? Is it this grim lich, which is writhing in its pit, lifting its lid with whitish limbs, rising, vivific, with ill will in its mind, victimizing kids timid with fright? If it is  which blind witch is midwifing its misbirth, binding this hissing djinni with witching spiritism? Is it this thin, sickish girl, twitching in fits, whilst writing things in spirit-writing? If it isnt  it is I; it is I 

Lightning flicks its riding whip, blitzing this night with bright schisms. Sick with phthisis in this drizzling mist, I limp, sniffling, spitting bilic spit, itching livid skin (skin which is tingling with stinging pinpricks). I find this frigid drisk dispiriting; still, I fight its chilling windchill. I climb cliffs, flinching with skittish instincts. I might slip. I might twist this infirm wrist, crippling it, wincing whilst I bind it in its splint, cringing whilst I gird it in its sling; still, I risk climbing, sticking with it, striving till I find this rift, in which I might fit, hiding in it till winds diminish.

Minds grim with nihilism still find first light inspiring. Mild pink in tint, its shining twilight brings bright tidings which lift sinking spirits. With firm will, I finish climbing, hiking till I find this inviting inn, in which I might sit, dining. I thirst. I bid girls bring stiff drinks  gin fizz which I might sip whilst finishing this rich dish, nibbling its tidbits: ribs with wings in chili, figs with kiwis in icing. I swig citric drinks with vim, tippling kirsch, imbibing it till, giggling, I flirt with girlish virgins in miniskirts: wink, wink. I miss living in sin, pinching thighs, kissing lips pink with lipstick.

Slick pimps, bribing civic kingpins, distill gin in stills, spiking drinks with illicit pills which might bring bliss. Whiz kids in silk-knit shirts script films in which slim girls might strip, jiggling tits, wiggling hips, inciting wild shindigs. Twin siblings in bikinis might kiss rich bigwigs, giving this prim prig his wish, whipping him, tickling him, licking his limp dick till, rigid, his prick spills its jism. Shit! This ticklish victim is trifling with kink. Sick minds, thriving in kinship with pigs, might find insipid thrills in this filth. This flick irks critics. It is swinish; it is piggish. It stinks.

Thinking within strict limits is stifling. Whilst Viking knights fight griffins, I skirmish with this riddling sphinx (this sigil  I). I print lists, filing things (kin with kin, ilk with ilk), inscribing this distinct sign, listing things in which its imprint is intrinsic. I find its missing links, divining its implicit tricks. I find it whilst skindiving in Fiji; I find it whilst picnicking in Linz. I find it in Inniskillin; I find it in Mississippi. I find it whilst skiing in Minsk. (Is this intimism civilizing if Klimt limns it, if Liszt lilts it?) I sigh; I lisp. I finish writing this writ, signing it, kind sir: NIHIL DICIT, FINI.



for Yoko Ono

Loops on bold fonts now form lots of words for books. Books form cocoons of comfort  tombs to hold bookworms. Profs from Oxford show frosh who do post-docs how to gloss works of Wordsworth. Dons who work for proctors or provosts do not fob off school to work on crosswords, nor do dons go off to dorm rooms to loll on cots. Dons go crosstown to look for bookshops known to stock lots of top-notch goods: cookbooks, workbooks  room on room of how-to books for jocks (how to jog, how to box), books on pro sports: golf or polo. Old colophons on schoolbooks from schoolrooms sport two sorts of logo: oblong whorls, rococo scrolls  both on worn morocco.

Monks who vow to do Gods work go forth from donjons of monkhood to show flocks lost to God how Gods word brooks no crooks who plot to do wrong. Folks who go to Sodom kowtow to Moloch, so God drops H-bombs of horror onto poor townsfolk, most of whom mock Mormon proofs of godhood. Folks who do not follow Gods norms word for word woo Gods scorn, for God frowns on fools who do not conform to orthodox protocol. Whoso honors no cross of dolors nor crown of thorns doth go on, forsooth, to sow worlds of sorrow. Lo! No Song of Solomon comforts Job or Lot, both of whom know for whom gongs of doom doth toll. Oh, mondo doloroso.

Porno shows folks lots of sordor  zoom-shots of Bjrn Borgs bottom or Snoop Doggs crotch. Johns who don condoms for blowjobs go downtown to Soho to look for pornshops known to stock lots of lowbrow schlock  off-color porn for old boors who long to drool onto color photos of cocks, boobs, dorks or dongs. Homos shoot photos of footlong schlongs. Blond trollops who don go-go boots flop pompoms nonstop to do promos for floorshows. Wow! Hot blonds who doff cotton frocks show off soft bosoms. Hot to trot, two blonds who smooch now romp on cold wood floors for crowds of morons, most of whom hoot or howl: whoop, whoop.

Blond showfolk who do soft porn go to boomtowns to look for work on photo shoots. Molls who hobnob from mob boss to mob boss croon solos from old torchsongs. Molls who do so do so molto sordo  too slow for most crowds to follow, so most crowds scoff: boo, boo. Folks who do not know how to plot common chords for rock songs or folk songs soon look for good songbooks on how to do so. Folks too cool to go to sock hops go to Woodstock rock shows to do pot, not to foxtrot to Motown rondos of pop, bop or doo-wop. Congo bongos throb to voodoo hoodoo; tom-toms for powwows go boom, boom. Gongs go bong. Kotos go bonk. Horns honk: toot, toot.

Folks from Kokomo do lots of shrooms (not snow, not blow  no form of hops). Folks who long to prolong moods of torpor do Zoloft or nod off on two drops of chloroform. Goofs who goof off go off to poolrooms to jolt down lots of good strong bock from Coors or Stroh. Most tosspots who toss down jolts of Grolsch do so to drown sorrows. Poor sots, blotto on two shots of scotch, go loco for old port or hot grog. Lots of hobos who do odd jobs for food go off to work to work on jobs no boss stoops to do  jog brooms of soot, mop floors of loos. Old coots, known to go to grogshops for snorts of wormwood hooch, go on to mooch dogfood from dogs.

Snobs who go to Bonn for bonbons know how to shop for good food: go to Moncton for cod, go to Concord for lox. Cooks who know how to cook coq dor cook cochon dOrmont or cochon dOrloff, not pork chops or pork hocks. Cooks who do not know how to cook posh food do not opt to shop for lots of tools: no woks, spoons or forks, no pots, crocks or bowls. Cooks from Foochow or Soochow chow down on two sorts of broth: oolong or wonton. Folks from Stockholm scoff down bowls of borscht. Folks too poor to chow down on bon porc or coq gros wolf down corncobs or corndogs. Moms cook hotdogs for tots who chomp on orts of popcorn.

Scows from London go to Moscow, not to Boston, to drop off bolts of mothproof cloth: wool for long johns, wool for work socks. Moors from Morocco, not from Kowloon, go to Oporto to drop off two sorts of orlon floss (both sold to commonfolk, most of whom know how to do clothwork on looms): spools of cord (for hooks to hook), spools of woof (for combs to comb). Folks who work on looms knot knots to form cloth goods for showrooms to show: cotton shorts or cotton smocks  lots of togs for fops who go from shop to shop to look for thong gowns, now worn to proms. Folks who don ponchos for comfort don boots or clogs to go for strolls on downtown docks.

Brown logbooks show how scows from Norfolk go from port to port to stow on docks tons of hotchpotch goods: tools from workrooms, props from workshops (cogs for motors, rods for rotors)  box on box of foolproof clocks, row on row of clockwork robots. Scows from Toronto tow lots of logs thrown onto pontoons: tons of softwood, tons of cordwood  block on block of wood good for woodwork: boxwood, bowwood, dogwood, logwood (most sorts of wood sold to workfolks who work for old wood-shops). Holds hold loot from Hong Kong or gold from Fort Knox. Old stockrooms stock lots of shopworn dross: doorknobs for doors, lockworks for locks.

Dhows from Colombo confront monsoons  strong storms known to slosh spoom onto prows of sloops. Folks who row old scows to cross floods of froth do not row scows worn down from wood rot (for most dolts who do so go forth, shorn of control, to rock, to roll, on storm-blown bobs of cork  now blown to or fro, now blown on or off, most known plots to known ports): whoosh, whoosh. Moms who sob for lost sons blow conch horns to honor poor fools who, thrown from port bows, go down, down, down (oh no) to drown  lost for good, now food for worms. Pods of octopods swoop down onto schools of cod to look for food: swoosh, swoosh.

Cold stormfronts from snowstorms blow snow onto fjords north of Oslo. Most storms howl for months: frost snows onto woods; froth blows onto rocks. From now on, snowplows plow snow. Cool brooks flow from grottos, down oxbows, to form pools or ponds. Long fronds of moonwort, known to grow from offshoot growths of rootstock, grow on moss bogs of sod. Soft blossoms of snowdrop now bloom on moors. Soon fog, not smog, rolls off old lochs onto boondocks of phlox. Lots of frogs hop from rock to rock: frog, pond, plop. Cows moo-moo to foghorns. Dogs bow-wow to moonglow. Most loons coo soft coos: coo, coo. Hoot owls hoot: hoo, hoo.

Brown storks flock to brooks to look for schools of smolt or schools of snook. Wolf dogs (los lobos) prowl woods or moors to look for spoor of wood-fowl or moorfowl. Most sorts of fox go off to snoop for coops known to hold woodcocks or moorcocks. Zoos known to stock zoomorphs (crocs or komodos, coons or bonobos) show off odd fowl: condors, hoopoos, flocks of owls or loons (not flocks of rocs or dodos). Most sloths, too slow to scoot from log to log, loll on mossgrown knolls of cottonwood to chomp on bollworms. Most worms molt from soft pods of cocoons to form broods of moths (two sorts: wood moth or moon moth): shoo, moth, shoo.

Scots from hogtowns or cowtowns work from cockcrow to moondown  to chop down woodlots, to plow down cornrows. Folks who work from morn to noon throw down slop to hogs or corn to sows. Most workfolk who sow crops of broomcorn grow corn crops sown from lots of cowflop compost (blobs of poo or globs of goo). From two oclock on, workfolk groom colts born of broncos. Most cowfolk who hold onto cowprods to prod two sorts of ox (shorthorn or pronghorn) flog no shod ox sold to tow oxplows. Most honchos who own lots of longhorns on hoof shoot cows known to host cowpox. Dogs growl. Hogs snort. Most rooks or crows roost on rooftops.

Crooks who con folks go door to door to show folks lots of books on how to boost longshot growth of hot-shot stocks or low-cost bonds. Crooks who do so fob off fools gold onto fools. Crowds of droogs, who don workboots to stomp on downtrod hobos, go on to rob old folks, most of whom own posh co-op condos. Goons who shoot folks knock down doors, storm control rooms. Bronx cops do crowd control. Corps of shock-troops cordon off two blocks of shops to look for kooks who concoct knock-off bombs. Corps of storm-troops confront mobs of lowborn hoods, most of whom lob Molotov bombs to bomb pollbooths or tollbooths: pow, pow  boom.

Crowds of Ostrogoths who howl for blood go off on foot  to storm forts, to torch towns. Mongol troops, grown strong from bloodsport, loot strongholds of lords known to own tons of gold. Goths who lop off locks on doors of tombs spot no strongbox of loot  no gold, no boon  for Goths confront horrors too gross for words: gorgons from Mordor, kobolds from Chthon. Bold sons of Thor, god of storms, hold off, sword for sword, mobs of Morlocks  trolls who flood forth from bottommost worlds of rockbottom gloom. Orcs shoot bolts from crossbows. Lots of potshots, shot off from bows, mow down throngs of cohorts, most of whom swoon from loss of blood.

Goths who rob tombs confront old ghosts (most of whom prowl from ghost town to ghost town to spook poltroons). Lots of ghosts, who brood, forlorn, on moods of loss, howl for long-lost consorts  blond frows, sworn to honor fond vows of forsworn troth (now long forgot). Most consorts, too forlorn to long for comfort from sorrow, sob: boohoo, boohoo  so bozo clowns, who know not how to frown, don coxcombs, for pomp, for show, to spoof droll plots from books. Most fools who josh lords or mock snobs don hoods or cowls to do so (for wroth lords who scowl oft long to shoot folks who honor no form of snob-dom). Most fools go: oops, ow  oh, bollocks: ho, ho.

Troop doctors who stop blood loss from torn colons or shot torsos go to Kosovo to work pro bono for poor commonfolk, most of whom confront horrors born of long pogroms. Good doctors who go to post-op to comfort folks look for sponsors to sponsor downtrod POWs from Lvov or Brno. Good doctors do months of work on blood flow to show how no form of pox (no protozoon, no sporozoon) clots blood from blood donors. Most Dogon, voodoo doctors, who splosh oxblood onto voodoo dolls, know how to concoct good mojo for octoroons from Togo. Folk doctors cook pots of bromo from roots of bloodwort or toothwort  common worts for common colds.

Profs who work for Komsomol go to Novgorod to work on robot bombs: H-bombs or N-bombs (two sorts of bloodshot horror for worlds of tomorrow). Most profs who know how to work control knobs on chronotrons shoot protons from cosmotrons to clock how long two photons glow. Orbs of phosphor throw off bolts of hot volts (googols of bosons from photoprotons of thoron). Lots of robots mold strong forms of boron for hot-rod motors (most sold to Ford, not to Volvo): zoom, zoom  vroom. Poof! Dots of color, blown off from blowtorch torchglow, scorch lots of moths (for moths oft bob from torch to torch). Most glowworms glow.

Profs who go to Knossos to look for books on Phobos or Kronos go on to jot down monophthongs (kof or rho) from two monoglot scrolls on Thoth, old god of Copts  both scrolls torn from horn books, now grown brown from mold. Profs who gloss works of Woolf, Gogol, Frost or Corot look for books from Knopf: Oroonoko or Nostromo  not Hopscotch (nor Tlooth). Profs who do schoolwork on Pollock look for photo-books on Orozco or Rothko (two tomfools who throw bold colors, blotch on blotch, onto tondos of drop-cloth). Log onto Hotbot dotcom to look for books on whos who or wots wot (for books of bons mots show folks lots of mottos to follow). How now brown cow.


for Zhu Yu

Kultur spurns Ubu  thus Ubu pulls stunts. Ubu shuns Skulptur: Uruk urns (plus busts), Zulu jugs (plus tusks). Ubu sculpts junk fr Kunst und Glck. Ubu busks. Ubu drums drums, plus Ubu strums cruths (such hubbub, such ruckus): thump, thump; thrum, thrum. Ubu puns puns. Ubu blurts untruth: much bunkum (plus bull), much humbug (plus bunk)  but trustful schmucks trust such untruthful stuff; thus Ubu (cult guru) must bluff dumbstruck numbskulls (such chumps). Ubu mulcts surplus funds (trust funds plus slush funds). Ubu usurps much usufruct. Ubu sums up lump sums. Ubu trumps dumb luck.

Duluth dump trucks lurch, pull U-turns. Such trucks dump much undug turf: clunk, clunk  thud. Scum plus crud plugs up ducts; thus Ubu must flush such sulcus ruts. Sump pumps pump: chuff, chuff. Such pumps suck up mush plus muck  dung lumps (plus clumps), turd hunks (plus chunks): grugru grubs plus fungus slugs mulch up humus pulp. Ubu unplugs flux. Ubu scrubs up curbs; thus Ubu must brush up sulfur dust plus lugnut rust: scuff, scuff. Ubu burns unburnt mundungus. Ubu lugs stuff; Ubu tugs stuff. Ubu puts up fulcrums. Ubu puts up mud huts, but mugwumps shun such glum suburb slums: tut, tut.

Dutch smut churns up blushful succubus lusts; thus buff hunks plus hung studs must fuck lustful sluts: Ruth plus Lulu. Ubu struts. Ubu snuffs up drugs. Ubu hugs Ruth; thus Ruth purrs. Ubu untucks Ruths muumuu; thus Ruth must untruss Ubus tux. Ubu fluffs Lulus tutu. Ubu cups Lulus dugs; Ubu rubs Lulus buns; thus Lulu must pull Ubus pud. Ubu sucks Ruths cunt; Ubu cuffs Ruths butt. Ubu stuffs Ruths bum(such fun). Ubu pumps Lulus plush, sunburnt tush. Ubu humps Lulus plump, upthrust rump. Ubu ruts. Ubu huffs; Ubu puffs. Ubu blurts: push, push. Ubu thrusts. Ubu bucks. Cum spurts. Ubu cums.

Ubu gulps up brunch: duck, hummus, nuts, fugu, bulgur, buns (crusts plus crumbs), blutwurst, brh-wurst, spuds, curds, plums: munch, munch. Ubu sups. Ubu slurps rum punch. Ubu chugs full cups (plus mugs), full tubs (plus tuns): glug, glug. Ubu gluts up grub; thus Ubus plump gut hurts. Ubu grunts: ugh, ugh. Ubu burps up mucus sputum. Ubu upchucks lunch. Ubu slumps. Ubu sulks. Ubu shrugs. Ubu slurs drunk chums. Ubu snubs such drunks; thus curt churls cuss: shut up, Ubu, shut up. Gruff punks club Ubu. Butch thugs drub Ubu. Ku-klux cults kung-fu punch Ubu. Rumdum bums bust up pubs.

Gulls churr: ululu, ululu. Ducks cluck. Bulls plus bucks run thru buckbrush; thus dun burrs clutch fur tufts. Ursus cubs plus Lupus pups hunt skunks. Curs skulk (such mutts lurk: ruff, ruff ). Gnus munch kudzu. Lush shrubs bud; thus church nuns pluck uncut mums. Bugs hum: buzz, buzz. Dull susurrus gusts murmur hushful, humdrum murmurs: hush, hush. Dusk suns blush. Surf lulls us. Such scuds hurl up cumulus suds (Sturm und Druck)  furls unfurl: rush, rush; curls uncurl: gush, gush. Such tumult upturns unsunk hulls; thus gulfs crush us, gulp, dunk us  burst lungs succumb.

